For Review

121. On October 21, 1982, the Bureau of the Mint changed the
composition of pennies (see Exercise 120). Instead of an
alloy of 95% Cu and 5% Zn by mass, a core of 99.2% Zn and
0.8% Cu with a thin shell of copper was adopted. The overall
composition of the new penny was 97.6% Zn and 2.4% Cu
by mass. Does this account for the difference in mass among
the pennies in Exercise 120? Assume the volume of the individual metals that make up each penny can be added together
to give the overall volume of the penny, and assume each
penny is the same size. (Density of Cu 5 8.96 g/cm3; density
of Zn 5 7.14 g/cm3.)
122. As part of a science project, you study traffic patterns in your
city at an intersection in the middle of downtown. You set up a
device that counts the cars passing through this intersection
for a 24-hr period during a weekday. The graph of hourly traffic looks like this.

34g

125. Confronted with the box shown in the diagram, you wish to
discover something about its internal workings. You have no
tools and cannot open the box. You pull on rope B, and it
moves rather freely. When you pull on rope A, rope C appears
to be pulled slightly into the box. When you pull on rope C,
rope A almost disappears into the box.*

A

B

C

Number of Cars

12 A.M.

noon

6 A.M.

6 P.M.

Time

a. At what time(s) does the highest number of cars pass
through the intersection?
b. At what time(s) does the lowest number of cars pass
through the intersection?
c. Briefly describe the trend in numbers of cars over the
course of the day.
d. Provide a hypothesis explaining the trend in numbers of
cars over the course of the day.
e. Provide a possible experiment that could test your
hypothesis.
123. Sterling silver is a solid solution of silver and copper. If a
piece of a sterling silver necklace has a mass of 105.0 g and a
volume of 10.12 mL, calculate the mass percent of copper in
the piece of necklace. Assume that the volume of silver present plus the volume of copper present equals the total volume.
Refer to Table 1.5.

a. Based on these observations, construct a model for the
interior mechanism of the box.
b. What further experiments could you do to refine your
model?
126. An experiment was performed in which an empty 100-mL
graduated cylinder was weighed. It was weighed once again
after it had been filled to the 10.0-mL mark with dry sand. A
10-mL pipet was used to transfer 10.00 mL of methanol to the
cylinder. The sand–methanol mixture was stirred until bubbles
no longer emerged from the mixture and the sand looked uniformly wet. The cylinder was then weighed again. Use the
data obtained from this experiment (and displayed at the end
of this problem) to find the density of the dry sand, the density
of methanol, and the density of sand particles. Does the bubbling that occurs when the methanol is added to the dry sand
indicate that the sand and methanol are reacting?
Mass of cylinder plus wet sand

45.2613 g

Mass of cylinder plus dry sand

37.3488 g

Mass of empty cylinder

22.8317 g

Volume of dry sand

10.0 mL

Volume of sand plus methanol

17.6 mL

Volume of methanol

10.00 mL

mass of copper
3 100
total mass
124. Make molecular-level (microscopic) drawings for each of the
following.
a. Show the differences between a gaseous mixture that is a
homogeneous mixture of two different compounds, and a
gaseous mixture that is a homogeneous mixture of a
compound and an element.
b. Show the differences among a gaseous element, a liquid
element, and a solid element.
Mass percent of copper 5

*From Yoder, Suydam, and Snavely, Chemistry (New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, 1975), pp. 9–11.

34h

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to find
the solutions.
127. The U.S. trade deficit at the beginning of 2005 was
$475,000,000. If the wealthiest 1.00% of the U.S. population
(297,000,000) contributed an equal amount of money to bring
the trade deficit to $0, how many dollars would each person
contribute? If one of these people were to pay his or her share
in nickels only, how many nickels are needed? Another person
living abroad at the time decides to pay in pounds sterling (£).
How many pounds sterling does this person contribute
(assume a conversion rate of 1 £ 5 $1.869)?

128. The density of osmium is reported by one source to be
22,610 kg/m3. What is this density in g/cm3? What is the mass
of a block of osmium measuring 10.0 cm 3 8.0 cm 3 9.0 cm?
129. At the Amundsen-Scott South Pole base station in Antarctica,
when the temperature is 2100.08F, researchers who live there
can join the “300 Club” by stepping into a sauna heated to
200.08F then quickly running outside and around the pole that
marks the South Pole. What are these temperatures in 8C?
What are these temperatures in K? If you measured the temperatures only in 8C and K, can you become a member of the
“300 Club” (that is, is there a 300.-degree difference between
the temperature extremes when measured in 8C and K)?

CHAPTER

Polarized light micrograph of crystals of vitamin C. (Marek Mis/Science Source)

Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4

The Early History of Chemistry

2.5

Fundamental Chemical Laws
Dalton’s Atomic Theory
Early Experiments to Characterize
the Atom
The Electron
Radioactivity
The Nuclear Atom

2.6
2.7

The Modern View of Atomic
Structure: An Introduction

2.8

Naming Simple Compounds
Binary Ionic Compounds (Type I)

Molecules and Ions

Formulas from Names

An Introduction to the Periodic
Table

Binary Ionic Compounds (Type II)
Ionic Compounds with Polyatomic
Ions
Binary Covalent Compounds
(Type III)
Acids

W

here does one start in learning chemistry? Clearly we must consider
some essential vocabulary and something about the origins of the science before we can proceed very far. Thus, while Chapter 1 provided background on
the fundamental ideas and procedures of science in general, Chapter 2 covers the
specific chemical background necessary for understanding the material in the next
few chapters. The coverage of these topics is necessarily brief at this point. We will
develop these ideas more fully as it becomes appropriate to do so. A major goal of
this chapter is to present the systems for naming chemical compounds to provide
you with the vocabulary necessary to understand this book and to pursue your laboratory studies.
Because chemistry is concerned first and foremost with chemical changes, we will
proceed as quickly as possible to a study of chemical reactions (Chapters 3 and 4).
However, before we can discuss reactions, we must consider some fundamental ideas
about atoms and how they combine.

2.1 The Early History of Chemistry
Chemistry has been important since ancient times. The processing of natural ores to
produce metals for ornaments and weapons and the use of embalming fluids are just
two applications of chemical phenomena that were utilized prior to 1000 b.c.
The Greeks were the first to try to explain why chemical changes occur. By about
400 b.c. they had proposed that all matter was composed of four fundamental substances: fire, earth, water, and air. The Greeks also considered the question of whether
matter is continuous, and thus infinitely divisible into smaller pieces, or composed of
small, indivisible particles. Supporters of the latter position were Demokritos* of
Abdera (c. 460–c. 370 b.c.) and Leucippos, who used the term atomos (which later
became atoms) to describe these ultimate particles. However, because the Greeks had
no experiments to test their ideas, no definitive conclusion could be reached about the
divisibility of matter.
The next 2000 years of chemical history were dominated by a pseudoscience called
alchemy. Some alchemists were mystics and fakes who were obsessed with the idea of
turning cheap metals into gold. However, many alchemists were serious scientists, and
this period saw important advances: The alchemists discovered several elements and
learned to prepare the mineral acids.
The foundations of modern chemistry were laid in the sixteenth century with
the development of systematic metallurgy (extraction of metals from ores) by a
German, Georg Bauer (1494–1555), and the medicinal application of minerals by a
Swiss alchemist/physician known as Paracelsus (full name: Philippus Theophrastus
Bombastus von Hohenheim [1493–1541]).
The first “chemist” to perform truly quantitative experiments was Robert Boyle
(1627–1691), who carefully measured the relationship between the pressure and volume
of air. When Boyle published his book The Skeptical Chymist in 1661, the quantitative
sciences of physics and chemistry were born. In addition to his results on the quantitative behavior of gases, Boyle’s other major contribution to chemistry consisted of his
ideas about the chemical elements. Boyle held no preconceived notion about the number of elements. In his view, a substance was an element unless it could be broken
down into two or more simpler substances. As Boyle’s experimental definition of an
element became generally accepted, the list of known elements began to grow, and the
Greek system of four elements finally died. Although Boyle was an excellent scientist,
he was not always right. For example, he clung to the alchemists’ views that metals
were not true elements and that a way would eventually be found to change one metal
into another.

*Democritus is an alternate spelling.

2.2 Fundamental Chemical Laws

Roald Hoffmann

FIGURE 2.1 The Priestley Medal is the highest honor given by the American Chemical Society.
It is named for Joseph Priestley, who was born in England on March 13, 1733. He performed many
important scientific experiments, among them the discovery that a gas later identified as carbon
dioxide could be dissolved in water to produce seltzer. Also, as a result of meeting Benjamin Franklin
in London in 1766, Priestley became interested in electricity and was the first to observe that graphite
was an electrical conductor. However, his greatest discovery occurred in 1774 when he isolated
oxygen by heating mercuric oxide.
Because of his nonconformist political views, Priestley was forced to leave England. He died in
the United States in 1804.

The phenomenon of combustion evoked intense interest in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries. The German chemist Georg Stahl (1660–1734) suggested that a
substance he called “phlogiston” flowed out of the burning material. Stahl postulated
that a substance burning in a closed container eventually stopped burning because the
air in the container became saturated with phlogiston. Oxygen gas, discovered by
Joseph Priestley (1733–1804),* an English clergyman and scientist (Fig. 2.1), was
found to support vigorous combustion and was thus supposed to be low in phlogiston.
In fact, oxygen was originally called “dephlogisticated air.”

2.2 Fundamental Chemical Laws
By the late eighteenth century, combustion had been studied extensively; the gases
carbon dioxide, nitrogen, hydrogen, and oxygen had been discovered; and the list of
elements continued to grow. However, it was Antoine Lavoisier (1743–1794), a French
chemist (Fig. 2.2), who finally explained the true nature of combustion, thus clearing
the way for the tremendous progress that was made near the end of the eighteenth
century. Lavoisier, like Boyle, regarded measurement as the essential operation of
chemistry. His experiments, in which he carefully weighed the reactants and products
of various reactions, suggested that mass is neither created nor destroyed. Lavoisier’s

FIGURE 2.2 Antoine Lavoisier was
born in Paris on August 26, 1743. Although
Lavoisier’s father wanted his son to follow
him into the legal profession, young
Lavoisier was fascinated by science. From
the beginning of his scientific career,
Lavoisier recognized the importance of
accurate measurements. His careful
weighings showed that mass is conserved
in chemical reactions and that combustion involves reaction with oxygen. Also,
he wrote the first modern chemistry textbook. It is not surprising that Lavoisier is
often called the father of modern
chemistry.
To help support his scientific work,
Lavoisier invested in a private taxcollecting firm and married the daughter
of one of the company executives. His
connection to the tax collectors proved
fatal, for radical French revolutionaries
demanded his execution, which occurred
on the guillotine on May 8, 1794.

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York. Image copyright © The Metropolitan Museum of Art/
Art Resource, NY

*Oxygen gas was actually first observed by the Swedish chemist Karl W. Scheele (1742–1786),
but because his results were published after Priestley’s, the latter is commonly credited with the
discovery of oxygen.

verification of this law of conservation of mass was the basis for the developments in
chemistry in the nineteenth century. Mass is neither created nor destroyed in a
chemical reaction.
Lavoisier’s quantitative experiments showed that combustion involved oxygen
(which Lavoisier named), not phlogiston. He also discovered that life was supported
by a process that also involved oxygen and was similar in many ways to combustion.
In 1789 Lavoisier published the first modern chemistry textbook, Elementary Treatise
on Chemistry, in which he presented a unified picture of the chemical knowledge
assembled up to that time. Unfortunately, in the same year the text was published, the
French Revolution broke out. Lavoisier, who had been associated with collecting taxes
for the government, was executed on the guillotine as an enemy of the people in 1794.
After 1800, chemistry was dominated by scientists who, following Lavoisier’s lead,
performed careful weighing experiments to study the course of chemical reactions and
to determine the composition of various chemical compounds. One of these chemists,
a Frenchman, Joseph Proust (1754–1826), showed that a given compound always contains exactly the same proportion of elements by mass. For example, Proust found that
the substance copper carbonate is always 5.3 parts copper to 4 parts oxygen to 1 part
carbon (by mass). The principle of the constant composition of compounds, originally
called “Proust’s law,” is now known as the law of definite proportion. A given compound always contains exactly the same proportion of elements by mass.
Proust’s discovery stimulated John Dalton (1766–1844), an English schoolteacher
(Fig. 2.3), to think about atoms as the particles that might compose elements. Dalton
reasoned that if elements were composed of tiny individual particles, a given compound
should always contain the same combination of these atoms. This concept explained
why the same relative masses of elements were always found in a given compound.
But Dalton discovered another principle that convinced him even more of the existence of atoms. He noted, for example, that carbon and oxygen form two different
compounds that contain different relative amounts of carbon and oxygen, as shown by
the following data:

Oxygen is from the French oxygène,
meaning “generator of acid,” because it was
initially considered to be an integral part
of all acids.

Mass of Oxygen That
Combines with 1 g of Carbon
Compound I

1.33 g

Compound II

2.66 g

Dalton noted that compound II contains twice as much oxygen per gram of carbon as
compound I, a fact that could easily be explained in terms of atoms. Compound I might
be CO, and compound II might be CO2.* This principle, which was found to apply to
compounds of other elements as well, became known as the law of multiple proportions: When two elements form a series of compounds, the ratios of the masses of
the second element that combine with 1 g of the first element can always be
reduced to small whole numbers.

Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society

*Subscripts are used to show the numbers of atoms present. The number 1 is understood (not written). The symbols for the elements and the writing of chemical formulas will be illustrated further
in Sections 2.6 and 2.7.

FIGURE 2.3 John Dalton (1766–1844), an Englishman, began teaching at a Quaker school
when he was 12. His fascination with science included an intense interest in meteorology, which led
to an interest in the gases of the air and their ultimate components, atoms. Dalton is best known for
his atomic theory, in which he postulated that the fundamental differences among atoms are their
masses. He was the first to prepare a table of relative atomic weights.
Dalton was a humble man with several apparent handicaps: He was not articulate and he was
color-blind, a terrible problem for a chemist. Despite these disadvantages, he helped to revolutionize the science of chemistry.

2.2 Fundamental Chemical Laws

To make sure the significance of this observation is clear, in Example 2.1 we will
consider data for a series of compounds consisting of nitrogen and oxygen.
EXAMPLE 2.1

Illustrating the Law of Multiple Proportions
The following data were collected for several compounds of nitrogen and oxygen:
Mass of Nitrogen That
Combines with 1 g of Oxygen
Compound A

1.750 g

Compound B

0.8750 g

Compound C

0.4375 g

Show how these data illustrate the law of multiple proportions.
SOLUTION

For the law of multiple proportions to hold, the ratios of the masses of nitrogen combining with 1 g of oxygen in each pair of compounds should be small whole numbers.
We therefore compute the ratios as follows:
A
1.750
B
0.8750
B
0.8750
C
0.4375
A
1.750
C
0.4375
These results support the law of multiple proportions.
See Exercises 2.41 and 2.42

The significance of the data in Example 2.1 is that compound A contains twice as
much nitrogen (N) per gram of oxygen (O) as does compound B and that compound B
contains twice as much nitrogen per gram of oxygen as does compound C.
These data can be explained readily if the substances are composed of molecules
made up of nitrogen atoms and oxygen atoms. For example, one set of possibilities for
compounds A, B, and C is
B:

A:
N
O

=

C:
N
O

=

N
O

=

Now we can see that compound A contains two atoms of N for every atom of O, whereas
compound B contains one atom of N per atom of O. That is, compound A contains twice
as much nitrogen per given amount of oxygen as does compound B. Similarly, since compound B contains one N per O and compound C contains one N per two Os, the nitrogen
content of compound C per given amount of oxygen is half that of compound B.
Another set of compounds that fits the data in Example 2.1 is
B:

A:

N
O

=

C:
N
O

=

N
O

=

Verify for yourself that these compounds satisfy the requirements.

Still another set that works is
B:

A:

N
O

=

C:

N
O

=

N
O

=

See if you can come up with still another set of compounds that satisfies the data in
Example 2.1. How many more possibilities are there?
In fact, an infinite number of other possibilities exists. Dalton could not deduce
absolute formulas from the available data on relative masses. However, the data on the
composition of compounds in terms of the relative masses of the elements supported
his hypothesis that each element consisted of a certain type of atom and that compounds were formed from specific combinations of atoms.

2.3 Dalton’s Atomic Theory
In 1808 Dalton published A New System of Chemical Philosophy, in which he presented his theory of atoms:

Dalton’s Atomic Theory
1. Each element is made up of tiny particles called atoms.
These statements are a modern paraphrase
of Dalton’s ideas.

2. The atoms of a given element are identical; the atoms of different elements are different
in some fundamental way or ways.
3. Chemical compounds are formed when atoms of different elements combine with
each other. A given compound always has the same relative numbers and types of
atoms.
4. Chemical reactions involve reorganization of the atoms—changes in the way they are
bound together. The atoms themselves are not changed in a chemical reaction.

It is instructive to consider Dalton’s reasoning on the relative masses of the
atoms of the various elements. In Dalton’s time water was known to be composed
of the elements hydrogen and oxygen, with 8 g of oxygen present for every 1 g of
hydrogen. If the formula for water were OH, an oxygen atom would have to have 8
times the mass of a hydrogen atom. However, if the formula for water were H2O
(two atoms of hydrogen for every oxygen atom), this would mean that each atom of
oxygen is 16 times as massive as each atom of hydrogen (since the ratio of the mass
of one oxygen to that of two hydrogens is 8 to 1). Because the formula for water
was not then known, Dalton could not specify the relative masses of oxygen and
hydrogen unambiguously. To solve the problem, Dalton made a fundamental
assumption: He decided that nature would be as simple as possible. This assumption led him to conclude that the formula for water should be OH. He thus assigned
hydrogen a mass of 1 and oxygen a mass of 8.
Using similar reasoning for other compounds, Dalton prepared the first table of
atomic masses (sometimes called atomic weights by chemists, since mass is often
determined by comparison to a standard mass—a process called weighing). Many of
the masses were later proved to be wrong because of Dalton’s incorrect assumptions
about the formulas of certain compounds, but the construction of a table of masses was
an important step forward.
Although not recognized as such for many years, the keys to determining absolute
formulas for compounds were provided in the experimental work of the French chemist Joseph Gay-Lussac (1778–1850) and by the hypothesis of an Italian chemist named

2.3 Dalton’s Atomic Theory

◀

Leemage/Getty Images

Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac, a French physicist and chemist, was remarkably versatile. Although he
is now known primarily for his studies on the combining of volumes of gases, Gay-Lussac was
instrumental in the studies of many of the other properties of gases. Some of Gay-Lussac’s motivation to learn about gases arose from his passion for ballooning. In fact, he made ascents to
heights of over 4 miles to collect air samples, setting altitude records that stood for about 50
years. Gay-Lussac also was the codiscoverer of boron and the developer of a process for manufacturing sulfuric acid. As chief assayer of the French mint, Gay-Lussac developed many techniques for chemical analysis and invented many types of glassware now used routinely in labs.
Gay-Lussac spent his last 20 years as a lawmaker in the French government.

Amadeo Avogadro (1776–1856). In 1809 Gay-Lussac performed experiments in
which he measured (under the same conditions of temperature and pressure) the volume of gases that reacted with each other. For example, Gay-Lussac found that 2 volumes of hydrogen react with 1 volume of oxygen to form 2 volumes of gaseous water
and that 1 volume of hydrogen reacts with 1 volume of chlorine to form 2 volumes of
hydrogen chloride. These results are represented schematically in Fig. 2.4.
In 1811 Avogadro interpreted these results by proposing that at the same temperature and pressure, equal volumes of different gases contain the same number of particles. This assumption (called Avogadro’s hypothesis) makes sense if the distances
between the particles in a gas are very great compared with the sizes of the particles.
Under these conditions, the volume of a gas is determined by the number of molecules
present, not by the size of the individual particles.
If Avogadro’s hypothesis is correct, Gay-Lussac’s result,
2 volumes of hydrogen react with 1 volume of oxygen 8n 2 volumes of water vapor
can be expressed as follows:

There are seven elements that occur as
diatomic molecules:
H2, N2, O2, F2, Cl2, Br2, I2

2 molecules* of hydrogen react with 1 molecule of oxygen 8n 2 molecules of water
These observations can best be explained by assuming that gaseous hydrogen, oxygen,
and chlorine are all composed of diatomic (two-atom) molecules: H2, O2, and Cl2,
respectively. Gay-Lussac’s results can then be represented as shown in Fig. 2.5. (Note
that this reasoning suggests that the formula for water is H2O, not OH as Dalton believed.)
Unfortunately, Avogadro’s interpretations were not accepted by most chemists, and
a half-century of confusion followed, in which many different assumptions were made
about formulas and atomic masses.
During the nineteenth century, painstaking measurements were made of the masses
of various elements that combined to form compounds. From these experiments a list
of relative atomic masses could be determined. One of the chemists involved in contributing to this list was a Swede named Jöns Jakob Berzelius (1779–1848), who
*A molecule is a collection of atoms (see Section 2.6).

+
2 volumes hydrogen

FIGURE 2.4 A representation of
some of Gay-Lussac’s experimental
results on combining gas volumes.

combines with 1 volume oxygen

to form 2 volumes gaseous water

+
1 volume hydrogen

combines with 1 volume chlorine to form 2 volumes hydrogen chloride

CHEMICAL CONNECTIONS
Berzelius, Selenium, and Silicon

J

öns Jakob Berzelius was probably
the best experimental chemist of
his generation and, given the crudeness of his laboratory equipment,
maybe the best of all time. Unlike
Lavoisier, who could afford to buy the
best laboratory equipment available,
Berzelius worked with minimal equipment in very plain surroundings. One
of Berzelius’s students described the
Swedish chemist’s workplace: “The
laboratory consisted of two ordinary
rooms with the very simplest arrangements; there were neither furnaces nor
hoods, neither water system nor gas.
Against the walls stood some closets
with the chemicals, in the middle the
mercury trough and the blast lamp
table. Beside this was the sink consisting of a stone water holder with a
stopcock and a pot standing under it.
[Next door in the kitchen] stood a
small heating furnace.”

FIGURE 2.5 A representation of
combining gases at the molecular level.
The spheres represent atoms in the
molecules.

In addition to these accomplishments, Berzelius discovered the elements cerium, thorium, selenium, and
silicon. Of these elements, selenium

In these simple facilities, Berzelius
performed more than 2000 experiments over a 10-year period to determine accurate atomic masses for the
50 elements then known. His success
can be seen from the data in the table
at right. These remarkably accurate
values attest to his experimental skills
and patience.
Besides his table of atomic
masses, Berzelius made many other
major contributions to chemistry.
The most important of these was the
invention of a simple set of symbols
for the elements along with a system for writing the formulas of
compounds to replace the awkward
symbolic representations of the
alchemists. Although some chemists, including Dalton, objected to
the new system, it was gradually
adopted and forms the basis of the
system we use today.

H H

H H

H H

+

+

Comparison of Several of Berzelius’s
Atomic Masses with the Modern Values
Atomic Mass
Berzelius’s
Value

Current
Value

Chlorine

35.41

35.45

Copper

63.00

63.55

Hydrogen

O

Cl

Element

1.00

1.01

Lead

207.12

207.2

Nitrogen

14.05

14.01

Oxygen

16.00

16.00

Potassium

39.19

39.10

Silver

108.12

107.87

Sulfur

32.18

32.07

O

Cl

H

H

O

Cl

H

H

H

O

H

Cl

discovered the elements cerium, selenium, silicon, and thorium and developed the
modern symbols for the elements used in writing the formulas of compounds.

2.4 Early Experiments to
Characterize the Atom
On the basis of the work of Dalton, Gay-Lussac, Avogadro, and others, chemistry was
beginning to make sense. The concept of atoms was clearly a good idea. Inevitably,
scientists began to wonder about the nature of the atom. What is an atom made of, and
how do the atoms of the various elements differ?

2.4 Early Experiments to Characterize the Atom

Substance

Alchemists’
Symbol

Silver
Lead
Tin
Platinum
Sulfuric acid
Alcohol
Sea salt

and silicon are particularly important
in today’s world. Berzelius discovered
selenium in 1817 in connection with his
studies of sulfuric acid. For years selenium’s toxicity has been known, but
only recently have we become aware
that it may have a positive effect on
human health. Studies have shown
that trace amounts of selenium in the
diet may protect people from heart
disease and cancer. One study based

on data from 27 countries showed an
inverse relationship between the
cancer death rate and the selenium
content of soil in a particular region
(low cancer death rate in areas with
high selenium content). Another
research paper reported an inverse
relationship between the selenium
content of the blood and the incidence of breast cancer in women. A
study reported in 1998 used the toenail clippings of 33,737 men to show
that selenium seems to protect
against prostate cancer. Selenium is
also found in the heart muscle and
may play an important role in proper
heart function. Because of these and
other studies, selenium’s reputation
has improved, and many scientists are
now studying its function in the
human body.
Silicon is the second most abundant element in the earth’s crust,
exceeded only by oxygen. As we will
see in Chapter 10, compounds involving silicon bonded to oxygen make
up most of the earth’s sand, rock, and
soil. Berzelius prepared silicon in its

pure form in 1824 by heating silicon
tetrafluoride (SiF4) with potassium
metal. Today, silicon forms the basis
for the modern microelectronics
industry centered near San Francisco
in a place that has come to be known
as “Silicon Valley.” The technology of
the silicon chip (see figure) with its
printed circuits has transformed computers from room-sized monsters with
thousands of unreliable vacuum tubes
to desktop and notebook-sized units
with trouble-free “solid-state”
circuitry.

Courtesy IBM

The Alchemists’ Symbols for
Some Common Elements and
Compounds

A chip capable of transmitting 4,000,000
simultaneous phone conversations.

The Electron
The first important experiments that led to an understanding of the composition of the
atom were done by the English physicist J. J. Thomson (Fig. 2.6), who studied electrical
discharges in partially evacuated tubes called cathode-ray tubes (Fig. 2.7) during the
period from 1898 to 1903. Thomson found that when high voltage was applied to the
tube, a “ray” he called a cathode ray (because it emanated from the negative electrode,
or cathode) was produced. Because this ray was produced at the negative electrode and
was repelled by the negative pole of an applied electric field (Fig. 2.8), Thomson postulated that the ray was a stream of negatively charged particles, now called electrons.
From experiments in which he measured the deflection of the beam of electrons in a
magnetic field, Thomson determined the charge-to-mass ratio of an electron:

Science & Society Picture Library /Getty Images

e
5 21.76 3 108 C/g
m
where e represents the charge on the electron in coulombs (C) and m represents the electron mass in grams.

FIGURE 2.6 J. J. Thomson (1856–1940) was an English physicist at Cambridge University. He
received the Nobel Prize in physics in 1906.

Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs
© Cengage Learning

Source of electrical potential

Stream of negative
particles (electrons)
(–)
Metal
electrode

(+)
Partially
evacuated
glass tube

Metal
electrode

StockFood/Getty Images

FIGURE 2.7 A cathode-ray tube. The fast-moving electrons excite the gas in the tube, causing a glow
between the electrodes. The green color in the photo is due to the response of the screen (coated with zinc
sulfide) to the electron beam.

▲
A classic English plum pudding in which
the raisins represent the distribution of
electrons in the atom.

One of Thomson’s primary goals in his cathode-ray tube experiments was to gain
an understanding of the structure of the atom. He reasoned that since electrons could
be produced from electrodes made of various types of metals, all atoms must contain
electrons. Since atoms were known to be electrically neutral, Thomson further assumed
that atoms also must contain some positive charge. Thomson postulated that an atom
consisted of a diffuse cloud of positive charge with the negative electrons embedded
randomly in it. This model, shown in Fig. 2.9, is often called the plum pudding model
because the electrons are like raisins dispersed in a pudding (the positive charge cloud),
as in plum pudding, a favorite English dessert.
In 1909 Robert Millikan (1868–1953), working at the University of Chicago, performed very clever experiments involving charged oil drops. These experiments
allowed him to determine the magnitude of the electron charge (Fig. 2.10). With this
value and the charge-to-mass ratio determined by Thomson, Millikan was able to calculate the mass of the electron as 9.11 3 10231 kg.

Radioactivity
In the late nineteenth century, scientists discovered that certain elements produce highenergy radiation. For example, in 1896 the French scientist Henri Becquerel found
accidentally that a piece of a mineral containing uranium could produce its image on
a photographic plate in the absence of light. He attributed this phenomenon to a spontaneous emission of radiation by the uranium, which he called radioactivity. Studies
in the early twentieth century demonstrated three types of radioactive emission:
gamma (g) rays, beta (b) particles, and alpha (a) particles. A g ray is high-energy
“light”; a b particle is a high-speed electron; and an a particle has a 21 charge, that is,
a charge twice that of the electron and with the opposite sign. The mass of an a particle
Spherical cloud of
positive charge
Applied
electric field

(+)

Electrons

(–)
Metal
electrode

(+)
(–)

Metal
electrode

FIGURE 2.8 Deflection of cathode rays by an applied electric field.

FIGURE 2.9 The plum pudding model of the atom.

2.4 Early Experiments to Characterize the Atom
Atomizer to
produce oil
droplets

Oil spray

(+)
Microscope

(–)

a

CalTech Archives

Electrically
charged plates

X-rays produce
charges on the
oil drops

b

FIGURE 2.10 (a) A schematic representation of the apparatus Millikan used to determine the charge on the electron.
The fall of charged oil droplets due to gravity can be halted by adjusting the voltage across the two plates. This voltage and
the mass of the oil drop can then be used to calculate the charge on the oil drop. Millikan’s experiments showed that the
charge on an oil drop is always a whole-number multiple of the electron charge. (b) A photograph of Millikan’s apparatus.

is 7300 times that of the electron. More modes of radioactivity are now known, and we
will discuss them in Chapter 19. Here we will consider only a particles because they
were used in some crucial early experiments.

The Nuclear Atom

Topham Picture Library/The Image Works

In 1911 Ernest Rutherford (Fig. 2.11), who performed many of the pioneering experiments to explore radioactivity, carried out an experiment to test Thomson’s plum pudding model. The experiment involved directing a particles at a thin sheet of metal foil,
as illustrated in Fig. 2.12. Rutherford reasoned that if Thomson’s model were accurate,
the massive a particles should crash through the thin foil like cannonballs through
gauze, as shown in Fig. 2.13(a). He expected the a particles to travel through the foil
with, at the most, very minor deflections in their paths. The results of the experiment

FIGURE 2.11 Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937) was born on a farm in New Zealand. In 1895 he
placed second in a scholarship competition to attend Cambridge University but was awarded the
scholarship when the winner decided to stay home and get married. As a scientist in England,
Rutherford did much of the early work on characterizing radioactivity. He named the a and b particles and the g ray and coined the term half-life to describe an important attribute of radioactive
elements. His experiments on the behavior of a particles striking thin metal foils led him to postulate the nuclear atom. He also invented the name proton for the nucleus of the hydrogen atom. He
received the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1908.

Some α particles
are scattered.
Source of
α particles

FIGURE 2.12 Rutherford’s experiment on a-particle bombardment of
metal foil.

Most particles
pass straight
through foil.

Beam of
α particles

Screen to detect
scattered α particles

Thin
metal foil

FIGURE 2.13 Rutherford’s
experiment.

Electrons scattered
throughout
–
–

Diffuse
positive
charge

–
–

–

–

–

–

–

–
n+

–

–

–

–

–

–
–

–

–

a
The expected results of the metal foil
experiment if Thomson’s model were correct.

–

b
Actual results.

were very different from those Rutherford anticipated. Although most of the a particles passed straight through, many of the particles were deflected at large angles, as
shown in Fig. 2.13(b), and some were reflected, never hitting the detector. This outcome was a great surprise to Rutherford. (He wrote that this result was comparable
with shooting a howitzer at a piece of paper and having the shell reflected back.)
Rutherford knew from these results that the plum pudding model for the atom could
not be correct. The large deflections of the a particles could be caused only by a center
of concentrated positive charge that contains most of the atom’s mass, as illustrated in
Fig. 2.13(b). Most of the a particles pass directly through the foil because the atom is
mostly open space. The deflected a particles are those that had a “close encounter”
with the massive positive center of the atom, and the few reflected a particles are those
that made a “direct hit” on the much more massive positive center.
In Rutherford’s mind these results could be explained only in terms of a nuclear
atom—an atom with a dense center of positive charge (the nucleus) with electrons moving around the nucleus at a distance that is large relative to the nuclear radius.
CRITICAL THINKING You have learned about three different
models of the atom: Dalton’s model, Thomson’s model, and Rutherford’s
model. What if Dalton was correct? What would Rutherford have expected
from his experiments with gold foil? What if Thomson was correct? What would
Rutherford have expected from his experiments with gold foil?

2.5 The Modern View of Atomic
Structure: An Introduction
Nucleus

~10−13 cm

~2 × 10−8 cm

In the years since Thomson and Rutherford, a great deal has been learned about atomic
structure. Because much of this material will be covered in detail in later chapters,
only an introduction will be given here. The simplest view of the atom is that it consists of a tiny nucleus (with a diameter of about 10213 cm) and electrons that move
about the nucleus at an average distance of about 1028 cm from it (Fig. 2.14).
As we will see later, the chemistry of an atom mainly results from its electrons. For
this reason, chemists can be satisfied with a relatively crude nuclear model. The nucleus
is assumed to contain protons, which have a positive charge equal in magnitude to the
electron’s negative charge, and neutrons, which have virtually the same mass as a proton
FIGURE 2.14 A nuclear atom viewed in cross section. Note that this drawing is not to scale.

2.5 The Modern View of Atomic Structure: An Introduction

TABLE 2.1 | The Mass and Charge of the Electron, Proton,
Photo © Cengage Learning. All rights reserved.

and Neutron

▲
If the atomic nucleus were the size of
this ball bearing, a typical atom would
be the size of this stadium.

The chemistry of an atom arises from its
electrons.

Particle

Mass

Charge*

Electron

9.109 3 10

kg

Proton

1.673 3 10227 kg

Neutron

1.675 3 10

kg

None

*The magnitude of the charge of the electron and the proton is 1.60 3 10219 C.

but no charge. The masses and charges of the electron, proton, and neutron are shown in
Table 2.1.
Two striking things about the nucleus are its small size compared with the overall
size of the atom and its extremely high density. The tiny nucleus accounts for almost all
the atom’s mass. Its great density is dramatically demonstrated by the fact that a piece
of nuclear material about the size of a pea would have a mass of 250 million tons!
An important question to consider at this point is, “If all atoms are composed of these
same components, why do different atoms have different chemical properties?” The
answer to this question lies in the number and the arrangement of the electrons. The
electrons constitute most of the atomic volume and thus are the parts that “intermingle”
when atoms combine to form molecules. Therefore, the number of electrons possessed
by a given atom greatly affects its ability to interact with other atoms. As a result, the
atoms of different elements, which have different numbers of protons and electrons,
show different chemical behavior.
A sodium atom has 11 protons in its nucleus. Since atoms have no net charge, the
number of electrons must equal the number of protons. Therefore, a sodium atom has
11 electrons moving around its nucleus. It is always true that a sodium atom has
11 protons and 11 electrons. However, each sodium atom also has neutrons in its
nucleus, and different types of sodium atoms exist that have different numbers of neutrons. For example, consider the sodium atoms represented in Fig. 2.15. These two
atoms are isotopes, or atoms with the same number of protons but different numbers of
neutrons. Note that the symbol for one particular type of sodium atom is written
Mass number

88n

n
Atomic number 88

11Na m Element symbol

where the atomic number Z (number of protons) is written as a subscript, and the mass
number A (the total number of protons and neutrons) is written as a superscript. (The
particular atom represented here is called “sodium twenty-three.” It has 11 electrons,
11 protons, and 12 neutrons.) Because the chemistry of an atom is due to its electrons,

Nucleus

Nucleus
11 protons
12 neutrons

FIGURE 2.15 Two isotopes of
sodium. Both have 11 protons and
11 electrons, but they differ in the
number of neutrons in their nuclei.

11 protons
13 neutrons

11 electrons

Na

11 electrons

Na

isotopes show almost identical chemical properties. In nature most elements contain mixtures of isotopes.
CRITICAL THINKING The average diameter of an atom is
2 3 10210 m. What if the average diameter of an atom were 1 cm? How tall
would you be?

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 2.2

Writing the Symbols for Atoms
Write the symbol for the atom that has an atomic number of 9 and a mass number of 19.
How many electrons and how many neutrons does this atom have?

SOLUTION

The atomic number 9 means the atom has 9 protons. This element is called fluorine,
symbolized by F. The atom is represented as
9F

and is called fluorine nineteen. Since the atom has 9 protons, it also must have 9 electrons to achieve electrical neutrality. The mass number gives the total number of protons and neutrons, which means that this atom has 10 neutrons.
See Exercises 2.61 through 2.66

2.6 Molecules and Ions
From a chemist’s viewpoint, the most interesting characteristic of an atom is its ability to
combine with other atoms to form compounds. It was John Dalton who first recognized
that chemical compounds are collections of atoms, but he could not determine the structure of atoms or their means for binding to each other. During the twentieth century, we
learned that atoms have electrons and that these electrons participate in bonding one
atom to another. We will discuss bonding thoroughly in Chapters 8 and 9; here, we will
introduce some simple bonding ideas that will be useful in the next few chapters.
The forces that hold atoms together in compounds are called chemical bonds.
One way that atoms can form bonds is by sharing electrons. These bonds are called
covalent bonds, and the resulting collection of atoms is called a molecule. Molecules can be represented in several different ways. The simplest method is the
chemical formula, in which the symbols for the elements are used to indicate the
types of atoms present and subscripts are used to indicate the relative numbers of
atoms. For example, the formula for carbon dioxide is CO2, meaning that each molecule contains 1 atom of carbon and 2 atoms of oxygen.
Examples of molecules that contain covalent bonds are hydrogen (H2), water (H2O),
oxygen (O2), ammonia (NH3), and methane (CH4). More information about a molecule
is given by its structural formula, in which the individual bonds are shown (indicated
by lines). Structural formulas may or may not indicate the actual shape of the molecule. For example, water might be represented as
H O H

O

or

H

H

The structure on the right shows the actual shape of the water molecule. Scientists
know from experimental evidence that the molecule looks like this. (We will study the
shapes of molecules further in Chapter 8.)

2.6 Molecules and Ions

Photos Ken O’Donoghue © Cengage Learning

H

C

H

H
H
Methane

a

b

c

FIGURE 2.16 (a) The structural formula for methane. (b) Space-filling model of methane.
This type of model shows both the relative sizes of the atoms in the molecule and their spatial
relationships. (c) Ball-and-stick model of methane.

N
H H H
Ammonia

The structural formula for ammonia is shown in the margin at left. Note that
atoms connected to the central atom by dashed lines are behind the plane of the
paper, and atoms connected to the central atom by wedges are in front of the plane
of the paper.
In a compound composed of molecules, the individual molecules move around as
independent units. For example, a molecule of methane gas can be represented in
several ways. The structural formula for methane (CH4) is shown in Fig. 2.16(a). The
space-filling model of methane, which shows the relative sizes of the atoms as well
as their relative orientation in the molecule, is given in Fig. 2.16(b). Ball-and-stick
models are also used to represent molecules. The ball-and-stick structure of methane
is shown in Fig. 2.16(c).
A second type of chemical bond results from attractions among ions. An ion is an
atom or group of atoms that has a net positive or negative charge. The best-known
ionic compound is common table salt, or sodium chloride, which forms when neutral
chlorine and sodium react.
To see how the ions are formed, consider what happens when an electron is transferred
from a sodium atom to a chlorine atom (the neutrons in the nuclei will be ignored):
Neutral sodium
atom (Na)
Sodium ion
(Na+)

11+

Minus 1 electron

11+

10 electrons
11 electrons

Na1 is usually called the sodium ion rather
than the sodium cation. Also Cl2 is called
the chloride ion rather than the chloride
anion. In general, when a specific ion is
referred to, the word ion rather than cation
or anion is used.

With one electron stripped off, the sodium, with its 11 protons and only 10 electrons,
now has a net 11 charge—it has become a positive ion. A positive ion is called a
cation. The sodium ion is written as Na1, and the process can be represented in shorthand form as
Na h Na 1 1 e 2

If an electron is added to chlorine,

Chloride ion
(Cl−)
Neutral chlorine
atom (Cl)

17+

17+

Plus 1 electron

17 electrons
18 electrons

the 18 electrons produce a net 12 charge; the chlorine has become an ion with a negative charge—an anion. The chloride ion is written as Cl2, and the process is represented as
Cl 1 e 2 h Cl 2

Photo © Cengage Learning. All rights reserved.

Photo © Cengage Learning. All rights reserved.

Photo © Cengage Learning. All rights reserved.

Because anions and cations have opposite charges, they attract each other. This
force of attraction between oppositely charged ions is called ionic bonding. As
illustrated in Fig. 2.17, sodium metal and chlorine gas (a green gas composed of

Photo © Cengage Learning. All rights reserved.

Cl− Cl− Na+
Na+
Na

Na
Cl Cl

FIGURE 2.17 Sodium metal (which is so soft it can be cut with a knife and which consists of individual
sodium atoms) reacts with chlorine gas (which contains Cl2 molecules) to form solid sodium chloride (which
contains Na1 and Cl2 ions packed together).

2.7 An Introduction to the Periodic Table

FIGURE 2.18 Ball-and-stick models
of the ammonium ion (NH41) and the
nitrate ion (NO32). These ions are each
held together by covalent bonds.

Cl2 molecules) react to form solid sodium chloride, which contains many Na1 and
Cl2 ions packed together and forms the beautiful colorless cubic crystals.
A solid consisting of oppositely charged ions is called an ionic solid. Ionic solids can consist of simple ions, as in sodium chloride, or of polyatomic (many atom)
ions, as in ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3), which contains ammonium ions (NH41)
and nitrate ions (NO32). The ball-and-stick models of these ions are shown in
Fig. 2.18.

2.7 An Introduction to the Periodic
Table
In a room where chemistry is taught or practiced, a chart called the periodic table is
almost certain to be found hanging on the wall. This chart shows all the known elements and gives a good deal of information about each. As our study of chemistry
progresses, the usefulness of the periodic table will become more obvious. This section will simply introduce it to you.
A simplified version of the periodic table is shown in Fig. 2.19. The letters in the
boxes are the symbols for the elements; these abbreviations are based on the current
Noble
gases

Alkaline
1 earth metals

Halogens 18

1A

Alkali metals

H

8A

2A

3A

4A

5A

6A

7A

He

Li

Be

B

C

N

O

F

Ne

Na

Mg

Al

Si

P

S

Cl

Ar

Transition metals

K

Ca

Sc

Ti

V

Cr

Mn

Fe

Co

Ni

Cu

Zn

Ga

Ge

As

Se

Br

Kr

Rb

Sr

Y

Zr

Nb

Mo

Tc

Ru

Rh

Pd

Ag

Cd

In

Sn

Sb

Te

I

Xe

Cs

Ba

La*

Hf

Ta

W

Re

Os

Ir

Pt

Au

Hg

Tl

Pb

Bi

Po

At

Rn

Fr

Ra

Ac†

Rf

Db

Sg

Bh

Hs

Mt

Ds

Rg

Cn

Nh

Fl

Mc

Lv

Ts

Og

*Lanthanides

Ce

Pr

Nd

Pm

Sm

Eu

Gd

Tb

Dy

Ho

Er

Tm

Yb

Lu

Th

Pa

U

Np

Pu

Am

Cm

Bk

Cf

Es

Fm

Md

No

Lr

†

Actinides

FIGURE 2.19 The periodic table.

TABLE 2.2 | The Symbols for the Elements That
Are Based on the Original Names
Current Name

Photo © Cengage Learning. All rights reserved.

Metals tend to form positive ions;
nonmetals tend to form negative ions.

▲
Samples of chlorine gas, liquid bromine,
and solid iodine.

Original Name

Symbol

Antimony

Stibium

Sb

Copper

Cuprum

Cu

Iron

Ferrum

Fe

Lead

Plumbum

Pb

Mercury

Hydrargyrum

Hg

Potassium

Kalium

K

Silver

Argentum

Ag

Sodium

Natrium

Na

Tin

Stannum

Sn

Tungsten

Wolfram

W

element names or the original names (Table 2.2). The number shown above each
symbol is the atomic number (number of protons) for that element. For example,
carbon (C) has atomic number 6, and lead (Pb) has atomic number 82. Most of the
elements are metals. Metals have characteristic physical properties such as efficient
conduction of heat and electricity, malleability (they can be hammered into thin
sheets), ductility (they can be pulled into wires), and (often) a lustrous appearance.
Chemically, metals tend to lose electrons to form positive ions. For example, copper
is a typical metal. It is lustrous (although it tarnishes readily); it is an excellent conductor of electricity (it is widely used in electrical wires); and it is readily formed into
various shapes, such as pipes for water systems. Copper is also found in many salts,
such as the beautiful blue copper sulfate, in which copper is present as Cu21 ions.
Copper is a member of the transition metals—the metals shown in the center of the
periodic table.
The relatively few nonmetals appear in the upper-right corner of the table (to the
right of the heavy line in Fig. 2.19), except hydrogen, a nonmetal that resides in the
upper-left corner. The nonmetals lack the physical properties that characterize
the metals. Chemically, they tend to gain electrons in reactions with metals to form
negative ions. Nonmetals often bond to each other by forming covalent bonds. For
example, chlorine is a typical nonmetal. Under normal conditions it exists as
Cl2 molecules; it reacts with metals to form salts containing Cl2 ions (NaCl, for
example); and it forms covalent bonds with nonmetals (for example, hydrogen
chloride gas, HCl).
The periodic table is arranged so that elements in the same vertical columns (called
groups or families) have similar chemical properties. For example, all of the alkali
metals, members of Group 1A—lithium (Li), sodium (Na), potassium (K), rubidium
(Rb), cesium (Cs), and francium (Fr)—are very active elements that readily form ions
with a 11 charge when they react with nonmetals. The members of Group 2A—
beryllium (Be), magnesium (Mg), calcium (Ca), strontium (Sr), barium (Ba), and
radium (Ra)—are called the alkaline earth metals. They all form ions with a
21 charge when they react with nonmetals. The halogens, the members of Group 7A—
fluorine (F), chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br), iodine (I), and astatine (At)—all form
diatomic molecules. Fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine all react with metals to
form salts containing ions with a 12 charge (F2, Cl2, Br2, and I2). The members of
Group 8A—helium (He), neon (Ne), argon (Ar), krypton (Kr), xenon (Xe), and
radon (Rn)—are known as the noble gases. They all exist under normal conditions as
monatomic (single-atom) gases and have little chemical reactivity.

2.8 Naming Simple Compounds

CHEMICAL CONNECTIONS
Hassium Fits Right In

H

For example, they have observed that
hassium atoms react with oxygen to
form a hassium oxide compound of
the type expected from its position on
the periodic table. The team has also
measured other properties of hassium, including the energy released as
it undergoes nuclear decay to another
atom.
This work would have surely pleased
Dmitri Mendeleev (see Fig. 7.24), who
originally developed the periodic table
and showed its power to predict chemical properties.

assium, element 108, does not exist
in nature but must be made in a
particle accelerator. It was first created
in 1984 and can be made by shooting
magnesium-26 ( 26
12 Mg) atoms at
curium-248 ( 248
96 Cm) atoms. The collisions between these atoms produce
some hassium-265 ( 265
108 Hs) atoms. The
position of hassium in the periodic
table (see Fig. 2.19) in the vertical column containing iron, ruthenium, and
osmium suggests that hassium should
have chemical properties similar to
these metals. However, it is not easy to

test this prediction—only a few atoms
of hassium can be made at a given
time and they last for only about
9 seconds. Imagine having to get
your next lab experiment done in
9 seconds!
Amazingly, a team of chemists
from the Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory in California, the Paul
Scherrer Institute and the University
of Bern in Switzerland, and the Institute of Nuclear Chemistry in Germany
have done experiments to characterize the chemical behavior of hassium.

Another format of the periodic table will be
discussed in Section 7.11.

Note from Fig. 2.19 that alternate sets of symbols are used to denote the groups.
The symbols 1A through 8A are the traditional designations, whereas the numbers
1 to 18 have been suggested recently. In this text the 1A to 8A designations will
be used.
The horizontal rows of elements in the periodic table are called periods. Horizontal
row 1 is called the first period (it contains H and He); row 2 is called the second period
(elements Li through Ne); and so on.
We will learn much more about the periodic table as we continue with our study of
chemistry. Meanwhile, when an element is introduced in this text, you should always
note its position on the periodic table.

2.8 Naming Simple Compounds
When chemistry was an infant science, there was no system for naming compounds.
Names such as sugar of lead, blue vitrol, quicklime, Epsom salts, milk of magnesia,
gypsum, and laughing gas were coined by early chemists. Such names are called common names. As chemistry grew, it became clear that using common names for compounds would lead to unacceptable chaos. Nearly 5 million chemical compounds are
currently known. Memorizing common names for these compounds would be an
impossible task.
The solution, of course, is to adopt a system for naming compounds in which the
name tells something about the composition of the compound. After learning the system, a chemist given a formula should be able to name the compound or, given a name,
should be able to construct the compound’s formula. In this section we will specify the
most important rules for naming compounds other than organic compounds (those
based on chains of carbon atoms).
We will begin with the systems for naming inorganic binary compounds—
compounds composed of two elements—which we classify into various types for easier recognition. We will consider both ionic and covalent compounds.

Binary Ionic Compounds (Type I)
Binary ionic compounds contain a positive ion (cation) always written first in the formula and a negative ion (anion). In naming these compounds, the following rules apply:

Naming Type I Binary Compounds
A monatomic cation has the same name as
its parent element.

1. The cation is always named first and the anion second.
2. A monatomic (meaning “one-atom”) cation takes its name from the name of the element.
For example, Na1 is called sodium in the names of compounds containing this ion.
3. A monatomic anion is named by taking the root of the element name and adding -ide.
Thus the Cl2 ion is called chloride.

Some common monatomic cations and anions and their names are given in Table 2.3.
The rules for naming binary ionic compounds are illustrated by the following
examples:
In formulas of ionic compounds, simple
ions are represented by the element
symbol: Cl means Cl2, Na means Na1, and
so on.

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 2.3

Compound

Ions Present

Name

NaCl
KI
CaS
Li3N
CsBr
MgO

Na1, Cl2
K1, I2
Ca21, S22
Li1, N32
Cs1, Br2
Mg21, O22

Sodium chloride
Potassium iodide
Calcium sulfide
Lithium nitride
Cesium bromide
Magnesium oxide

Naming Type I Binary Compounds
Name each binary compound.
a. CsF
b. AlCl3
c. LiH

SOLUTION

a. CsF is cesium fluoride.
b. AlCl3 is aluminum chloride.
c. LiH is lithium hydride.
Notice that, in each case, the cation is named first and then the anion is named.
See Exercise 2.75

TABLE 2.3 | Common Monatomic Cations and Anions
Cation

Anion

Name

Hydrogen

H

Hydride

Lithium

F2

Fluoride

Sodium

Cl

Chloride

Potassium

Br2

Bromide

Cesium

I

Iodide

Be21

Beryllium

O22

Oxide

Magnesium

S

Sulfide

Calcium

N32

Nitride

Barium

H

Li1
Na

K1
Cs

Mg

Ca21
Ba

Al31

Name

P

Phosphide

Aluminum

2.8 Naming Simple Compounds

TABLE 2.4 | Common Type II
Cations
Ion

Systematic Name

Fe31

Iron(III)

Iron(II)

Fe

Cu21

Copper(II)

Copper(I)

Co31

Cobalt(III)

Co21

Cobalt(II)

Sn41

Tin(IV)

Sn21

Tin(II)

Pb41

Lead(IV)

Lead(II)

Cu

Pb

Hg21
Hg2

21*

Ag1
Zn

Cd21

Mercury(II)
Mercury(I)
Silver†
Zinc†
Cadmium†

*Note that mercury(I) ions always occur
bound together to form Hg221 ions.
†
Although these are transition metals, they
form only one type of ion, and a Roman
numeral is not used.

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 2.4

Formulas from Names
So far we have started with the chemical formula of a compound and decided on its
systematic name. The reverse process is also important. For example, given the name
calcium chloride, we can write the formula as CaCl2 because we know that calcium
forms only Ca21 ions and that, since chloride is Cl2, two of these anions will be
required to give a neutral compound.

Binary Ionic Compounds (Type II)
In the binary ionic compounds considered earlier (Type I), the metal present forms
only a single type of cation. That is, sodium forms only Na1, calcium forms only Ca21,
and so on. However, as we will see in more detail later in the text, there are many metals that form more than one type of positive ion and thus form more than one type of
ionic compound with a given anion. For example, the compound FeCl2 contains Fe21
ions, and the compound FeCl3 contains Fe31 ions. In a case such as this, the charge on
the metal ion must be specified. The systematic names for these two iron compounds
are iron(II) chloride and iron(III) chloride, respectively, where the Roman numeral
indicates the charge of the cation.
Another system for naming these ionic compounds that is seen in the older literature was used for metals that form only two ions. The ion with the higher charge has a
name ending in -ic, and the one with the lower charge has a name ending in -ous.
In this system, for example, Fe31 is called the ferric ion, and Fe21 is called the
ferrous ion. The names for FeCl3 and FeCl2 are then ferric chloride and ferrous
chloride, respectively. In this text we will use the system that employs Roman
numerals. Table 2.4 lists the systematic names for many common type II cations.

Formulas from Names for Type I Binary Compounds
Given the following systematic names, write the formula for each compound:
a. potassium iodide
b. calcium oxide
c. gallium bromide

SOLUTION

Name

Formula

Comments

a. potassium iodide
b. calcium oxide
c. gallium bromide

KI
CaO
GaBr3

Contains K1 and I2
Contains Ca21 and O22
Contains Ga31 and Br2
Must have 3Br2 to balance charge of Ga31

See Exercise 2.75

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 2.5

Naming Type II Binary Compounds
1. Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a. CuCl
b. HgO
c. Fe2O3
2. Given the following systematic names, write the formula for each compound:
a. Manganese(IV) oxide
b. Lead(II) chloride

SOLUTION
Type II binary ionic compounds contain a
metal that can form more than one type
of cation.
A compound must be electrically neutral.

All of these compounds include a metal that can form more than one type of cation. Thus
we must first determine the charge on each cation. This can be done by recognizing
that a compound must be electrically neutral; that is, the positive and negative charges
must exactly balance.
1. Formula

Name

Comments

a. CuCl

Copper(I)
chloride

b. HgO

Mercury(II)
oxide
Iron(III)
oxide

Because the anion is Cl2, the cation must
be Cu1 (for charge balance), which
requires a Roman numeral I.
Because the anion is O22, the cation must
be Hg21 [mercury(II)].
The three O22 ions carry a total charge
of 62, so two Fe31 ions [iron(III)] are
needed to give a 61 charge.

Photo © Cengage Learning.
All rights reserved.

c. Fe2O3

▲
Mercury(II) oxide.

2. Name

Formula

Comments

a. Manganese(IV)
oxide

MnO2

b. Lead(II)
chloride

PbCl2

Two O22 ions (total charge 42)
are required by the Mn41 ion
[manganese(IV)].
Two Cl2 ions are required by the Pb21
ion [lead(II)] for charge balance.

See Exercise 2.76

A compound containing a transition metal
usually requires a Roman numeral in its
name.

Note that the use of a Roman numeral in a systematic name is required only in cases
where more than one ionic compound forms between a given pair of elements. This
case most commonly occurs for compounds containing transition metals, which often
form more than one cation. Elements that form only one cation do not need to be
identified by a Roman numeral. Common metals that do not require Roman numerals are the Group 1A elements, which form only 11 ions; the Group 2A elements,
which form only 21 ions; and aluminum, which forms only Al31. The element silver
deserves special mention at this point. In virtually all its compounds, silver is found as
the Ag1 ion. Therefore, although silver is a transition metal (and can potentially form
ions other than Ag1), silver compounds are usually named without a Roman numeral.
Thus AgCl is typically called silver chloride rather than silver(I) chloride, although the
latter name is technically correct. Also, a Roman numeral is not used for zinc compounds, since zinc forms only the Zn21 ion.
As shown in Example 2.5, when a metal ion is present that forms more than one
type of cation, the charge on the metal ion must be determined by balancing the positive and negative charges of the compound. To do this you must be able to recognize
the common cations and anions and know their charges (see Tables 2.3 and 2.5). The
procedure for naming binary ionic compounds is summarized in Fig. 2.20.

CRITICAL THINKING We can use the periodic table to tell us
something about the stable ions formed by many atoms. For example, the
atoms in column 1 always form 11 ions. The transition metals, however, can
form more than one type of stable ion. What if each transition metal ion
had only one possible charge? How would the naming of compounds be
different?

2.8 Naming Simple Compounds
FIGURE 2.20 Flowchart for naming
binary ionic compounds.

Does the compound contain
Type I or Type II cations?
Type I

Type II

Using the principle of charge
balance, determine the cation charge.

Name the cation using
the element name.

Include in the cation name a Roman
numeral indicating the charge.

Naming Binary Compounds

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 2.6

1. Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a. CoBr2
b. CaCl2
c. Al2O3
2. Given the following systematic names, write the formula for each compound:
a. Chromium(III) chloride
b. Gallium iodide
SOLUTION

Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs
© Cengage Learning

1. Formula

▲
Various chromium compounds dissolved in water. From left to right: CrCl2,
K2Cr2O7, Cr(NO3)3, CrCl3, K2CrO4.

Name

Comments

a. CoBr2

Cobalt(II)
bromide

b. CaCl2

Calcium
chloride

c. Al2O3

Aluminum
oxide

Cobalt is a transition metal; the compound
name must have a Roman numeral. The
two Br2 ions must be balanced by a
Co21 ion.
Calcium, an alkaline earth metal, forms
only the Ca21 ion. A Roman numeral is
not necessary.
Aluminum forms only the Al31 ion. A
Roman numeral is not necessary.

2. Name

Formula

Comments

a. Chromium(III)
chloride

CrCl3

b. Gallium iodide

GaI3

Chromium(III) indicates that Cr31 is
present, so 3 Cl2 ions are needed for
charge balance.
Gallium always forms 31 ions, so 3 I2
ions are required for charge balance.
See Exercises 2.77 and 2.78

The common Type I and Type II ions are summarized in Fig. 2.21. Also shown in
Fig. 2.21 are the common monatomic ions.

Ionic Compounds with Polyatomic Ions
Polyatomic ion formulas must be
memorized.

We have not yet considered ionic compounds that contain polyatomic ions. For example, the compound ammonium nitrate, NH4NO3, contains the polyatomic ions NH41
and NO32. Polyatomic ions are assigned special names that must be memorized to
name the compounds containing them. The most important polyatomic ions and their
names are listed in Table 2.5.

FIGURE 2.21 The common cations
and anions.

8A

1A
2A

3A

4A

+

Li

5A

6A

7A

3−

2−

O

F−

S2−

Cl−

N

Na+ Mg2+

Al3+
Cu+ Zn2+ Ga3+
Cu2+

Cr2+ Mn2+ Fe2+ Co2+
Cr3+ Mn3+ Fe3+ Co3+

K+ Ca2+
Rb+ Sr2+

Ag+ Cd2+

Cs+ Ba2+

Hg22+
2+
Hg

Common Type I cations

Common Type II cations

Br−
Sn2+
Sn4+
Pb2+
Pb4+

I−

Common monatomic anions

Note in Table 2.5 that several series of anions contain an atom of a given element
and different numbers of oxygen atoms. These anions are called oxyanions. When
there are two members in such a series, the name of the one with the smaller number
of oxygen atoms ends in -ite and the name of the one with the larger number ends in
-ate—for example, sulfite (SO322) and sulfate (SO422). When more than two oxyanions make up a series, hypo- (less than) and per- (more than) are used as prefixes to
name the members of the series with the fewest and the most oxygen atoms, respectively. The best example involves the oxyanions containing chlorine, as shown in
Table 2.5.

TABLE 2.5 | Common Polyatomic Ions
Ion

Name

Name

Mercury(I)

CO322

Carbonate

NH41

Ammonium

HCO32

Hydrogen carbonate
(bicarbonate is a widely
used common name)

ClO2 or OCl2

Hypochlorite

ClO22

Chlorite

Chlorate

Nitrite

NO32

Nitrate

SO322

Sulfite

SO422

Sulfate

HSO42

Hydrogen sulfate (bisulfate
is a widely used common
name)

NO2

OH2
CN

Hydroxide

PO432
HPO4

H2PO42

NCS or SCN

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 2.7

Ion

Hg221

ClO3

ClO42
C 2H 3O 2

Perchlorate

MnO42

Acetate
Permanganate

Cyanide

Cr2O7

Phosphate

CrO422

Chromate

Hydrogen phosphate

O2

Peroxide

Dihydrogen phosphate

C2O422

Oxalate

Thiocyanate

S 2O 3

Thiosulfate

Dichromate

Naming Compounds Containing Polyatomic Ions
1. Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a. Na2SO4
d. Mn(OH)2
b. KH2PO4
e. Na2SO3
c. Fe(NO3)3
f. Na2CO3

2.8 Naming Simple Compounds

2. Given the following systematic names, write the formula for each compound:
a. Sodium hydrogen carbonate
d. Sodium selenate
b. Cesium perchlorate
e. Potassium bromate
c. Sodium hypochlorite
SOLUTION

1. Formula
a. Na2SO4
b. KH2PO4

c. Fe(NO3)3

Name

Comments

Sodium sulfate
Potassium
dihydrogen
phosphate
Iron(III) nitrate

d. Mn(OH)2

Manganese(II)
hydroxide

e. Na2SO3
f. Na2CO3

Sodium sulfite
Sodium carbonate

2. Name
a. Sodium hydrogen
carbonate
b. Cesium
perchlorate
c. Sodium
hypochlorite
d. Sodium selenate
e. Potassium
bromate

Transition metal—name must contain
a Roman numeral. The Fe31 ion
balances three NO32 ions.
Transition metal—name must contain
a Roman numeral. The Mn21 ion
balances three OH2 ions.

Formula

Comments

NaHCO3

Often called sodium bicarbonate.

CsClO4
NaOCl
Na2SeO4
KBrO3

Atoms in the same group, like sulfur and
selenium, often form similar ions that
are named similarly. Thus SeO422 is
selenate, like SO42– (sulfate).
As above, BrO32 is bromate, like
ClO32 (chlorate).
See Exercises 2.79 and 2.80

Binary Covalent Compounds (Type III)
In binary covalent compounds, the element
names follow the same rules as for binary
ionic compounds.

Binary covalent compounds are formed between two nonmetals. Although these compounds do not contain ions, they are named very similarly to binary ionic compounds.

Naming Binary Covalent Compounds
1. The first element in the formula is named first, using the full element name.
2. The second element is named as if it were an anion.
3. Prefixes are used to denote the numbers of atoms present. These prefixes are given in
Table 2.6.
4. The prefix mono- is never used for naming the first element. For example, CO is called
carbon monoxide, not monocarbon monoxide.

TABLE 2.6 | Prefixes Used to
Indicate Number
in Chemical Names
Prefix

Number Indicated

mono-

di-

tri-

tetra-

penta-

hexa-

hepta-

octa-

nona-

deca-

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 2.8

To see how these rules apply, we will now consider the names of the several covalent compounds formed by nitrogen and oxygen:
Compound

Systematic Name

Common Name

N2O
NO
NO2
N2O3
N2O4
N2O5

Dinitrogen monoxide
Nitrogen monoxide
Nitrogen dioxide
Dinitrogen trioxide
Dinitrogen tetroxide
Dinitrogen pentoxide

Nitrous oxide
Nitric oxide

Notice from the preceding examples that to avoid awkward pronunciations, we
often drop the final o or a of the prefix when the element begins with a vowel. For
example, N2O4 is called dinitrogen tetroxide, not dinitrogen tetraoxide, and CO is
called carbon monoxide, not carbon monooxide.
Some compounds are always referred to by their common names. Three examples
are water, ammonia, and hydrogen peroxide. The systematic names for H2O, NH3, and
H2O2 are never used.

Naming Type III Binary Compounds
1. Name each of the following compounds:
a. PCl5
b. PCl3
c. SO2
2. From the following systematic names, write the formula for each compound:
a. Sulfur hexafluoride
b. Sulfur trioxide
c. Carbon dioxide

SOLUTION

1. Formula
a. PCl5
b. PCl3
c. SO2
2. Name
a. Sulfur hexafluoride
b. Sulfur trioxide
c. Carbon dioxide

Name
Phosphorus pentachloride
Phosphorus trichloride
Sulfur dioxide
Formula
SF6
SO3
CO2

See Exercises 2.81 and 2.82

The rules for naming binary compounds are summarized in Fig. 2.22. Prefixes
to indicate the number of atoms are used only in Type III binary compounds (those
containing two nonmetals). An overall strategy for naming compounds is given in
Fig. 2.23.

2.8 Naming Simple Compounds
Binary compound?

Yes

Metal present?

No

Yes

Type III:
Use prefixes.

Does the metal form
more than one cation?

No

Yes

Type II:
Determine the charge
of the cation; use a Roman
numeral after the element
name for the cation.

Type I:
Use the element
name for the cation.

FIGURE 2.22 A flowchart for naming binary compounds.

Binary compound?

No

Yes
Use the strategy
summarized
in Figure 2.22.

Polyatomic ion
or ions present?

No

This is a compound
for which naming
procedures have not
yet been considered.

Yes

Name the compound
using procedures similar
to those for naming
binary ionic compounds.

FIGURE 2.23 Overall strategy for naming chemical compounds.
INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 2.9

Naming Various Types of Compounds
1. Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a. P4O10
b. Nb2O5
c. Li2O2
d. Ti(NO3)4
2. Given the following systematic names, write the formula for each compound:
a. Vanadium(V) fluoride
b. Dioxygen difluoride
c. Rubidium peroxide
d. Gallium oxide

SOLUTION

1. Compound

Name

Comments

a. P4O10

Tetraphosphorus
decaoxide

b. Nb2O5

Niobium(V)
oxide

c. Li2O2

Lithium
peroxide
Titanium(IV)
nitrate

Binary covalent compound (Type III),
so prefixes are used. The a in decais sometimes dropped.
Type II binary compound containing
Nb51 and O22 ions. Niobium is
a transition metal and requires a
Roman numeral.
Type I binary compound containing the
Li1 and O222 (peroxide) ions.
Not a binary compound. Contains
the Ti41 and NO32 ions. Titanium
is a transition metal and requires a
Roman numeral.

d. Ti(NO3)4

2. Name

Chemical
Formula

a. Vanadium(V)
fluoride

VF5

b. Dioxygen
difluoride
c. Rubidium
peroxide

O2F2

d. Gallium oxide

Ga2O3

Rb2O2

Comments
The compound contains V51 ions and
requires five F2 ions for charge
balance.
The prefix di- indicates two of each
atom.
Because rubidium is in Group 1A,
it forms only 11 ions. Thus two
Rb1 ions are needed to balance the
22 charge on the peroxide ion (O222).
Because gallium is in Group 3A,
like aluminum, it forms only 31
ions. Two Ga31 ions are required
to balance the charge on three
O22 ions.
See Exercises 2.83, 2.87, and 2.88

Acids
Acids can be recognized by the hydrogen
that appears first in the formula.

When dissolved in water, certain molecules produce a solution containing free H1 ions
(protons). These substances, acids, will be discussed in detail in Chapters 4, 14,
and 15. Here we will simply present the rules for naming acids.
An acid is a molecule in which one or more H1 ions are attached to an anion. The
rules for naming acids depend on whether the anion contains oxygen. If the name
of the anion ends in -ide, the acid is named with the prefix hydro- and the suffix -ic.
For example, when gaseous HCl is dissolved in water, it forms hydrochloric acid.
Similarly, HCN and H2S dissolved in water are called hydrocyanic and hydrosulfuric acids, respectively.
When the anion contains oxygen, the acidic name is formed from the root name of
the anion with a suffix of -ic or -ous, depending on the name of the anion.
1. If the anion name ends in -ate, the suffix -ic is added to the root name. For
example, H2SO4 contains the sulfate anion (SO422) and is called sulfuric acid;
H3PO4 contains the phosphate anion (PO432) and is called phosphoric acid; and
HC2H3O2 contains the acetate ion (C2H3O22) and is called acetic acid.

2.8 Naming Simple Compounds

TABLE 2.7 | Names of Acids*

TABLE 2.8 | Names of Some

That Do Not
Contain Oxygen

Oxygen-Containing
Acids

Acid

Name

Acid

Name

HF

Hydrofluoric acid

HNO3

Nitric acid

HCl

Hydrochloric acid

HNO2

Nitrous acid

HBr

Hydrobromic acid

H2SO4

Sulfuric acid

HI

Hydroiodic acid

H2SO3

Sulfurous acid

HCN

Hydrocyanic acid

H3PO4

Phosphoric acid

H 2S

Hydrosulfuric acid

HC2H3O2

Acetic acid

*Note that these acids are aqueous
solutions containing these substances.

2. If the anion has an -ite ending, the -ite is replaced by -ous. For example, H2SO3,
which contains sulfite (SO322), is named sulfurous acid; and HNO2, which contains nitrite (NO22), is named nitrous acid.
The application of these rules can be seen in the names of the acids of the oxyanions
of chlorine:
Acid

Anion

Name

HClO4
HClO3
HClO2
HClO

Perchlorate
Chlorate
Chlorite
Hypochlorite

Perchloric acid
Chloric acid
Chlorous acid
Hypochlorous acid

The names of the most important acids are given in Tables 2.7 and 2.8. An overall
strategy for naming acids is shown in Fig. 2.24.
CRITICAL THINKING In this chapter, you have learned a
systematic way to name chemical compounds. What if all compounds had only
common names? What problems would this cause?

Does the anion contain oxygen?

No

hydro+ anion root
+ -ic
hydro(anion root)ic acid

Yes

Check the ending
of the anion.

-ite

FIGURE 2.24 A flowchart for
naming acids. An acid is best considered
as one or more H1 ions attached to an
anion.

anion or element root
+ -ous
(root)ous acid

-ate

anion or element root
+ -ic
(root)ic acid

For Review
Key terms

Fundamental laws

Section 2.2

❯

law of conservation of mass
law of definite proportion
law of multiple proportions

❯

Section 2.3

Dalton’s atomic theory

atomic masses
atomic weights
Avogadro’s hypothesis

❯

Section 2.4

cathode-ray tubes
electrons
radioactivity
nuclear atom
nucleus

❯

❯
❯
❯

All elements are composed of atoms.
All atoms of a given element are identical.
Chemical compounds are formed when atoms combine.
Atoms are not changed in chemical reactions, but the way they are bound together changes.

Early atomic experiments and models
❯
❯

Section 2.5

❯

proton
neutron
isotopes
atomic number
mass number

❯

Thomson model
Millikan experiment
Rutherford experiment
Nuclear model

Atomic structure
❯

Small, dense nucleus contains protons and neutrons.
Protons—positive charge
❯ Neutrons—no charge
Electrons reside outside the nucleus in the relatively large remaining atomic volume.
❯ Electrons—negative charge, small mass (1y1840 of proton)
Isotopes have the same atomic number but different mass numbers.
❯

Section 2.6

chemical bond
covalent bond
molecule
chemical formula
structural formula
space-filling model
ball-and-stick model
ion
cation
anion
ionic bond
ionic solid
polyatomic ion

Conservation of mass
Definite proportion
Multiple proportions

❯
❯

Atoms combine to form molecules by sharing electrons to form
covalent bonds.
❯
❯

Molecules are described by chemical formulas.
Chemical formulas show number and type of atoms.
❯ Structural formula
❯ Ball-and-stick model
❯ Space-filling model

Formation of ions
❯
❯
❯

Cation—formed by loss of an electron, positive charge
Anion—formed by gain of an electron, negative charge
Ionic bonds—formed by interaction of cations and anions

For Review

Key terms
Section 2.7

periodic table
metal
nonmetal
group (family)
alkali metals
alkaline earth metals
halogens
noble gases
period

The periodic table organizes elements in order of increasing
atomic number.
❯
❯
❯

Elements with similar properties are in columns, or groups.
Metals are in the majority and tend to form cations.
Nonmetals tend to form anions.

Compounds are named using a system of rules depending on the
type of compound.
❯

Binary compounds
Type I—contain a metal that always forms the same cation
❯ Type II—contain a metal that can form more than one cation
❯ Type III—contain two nonmetals
Compounds containing a polyatomic ion
❯

Section 2.8

binary compounds
binary ionic compounds
oxyanions
binary covalent compounds
acid

❯

Review Questions Answers to the Review Questions can be found on the Student website (accessible from www.cengagebrain.com).
1. Use Dalton’s atomic theory to account for each of the
following.
a. the law of conservation of mass
b. the law of definite proportion
c. the law of multiple proportions
2. What evidence led to the conclusion that cathode rays
had a negative charge?
3. What discoveries were made by J. J. Thomson, Henri
Becquerel, and Lord Rutherford? How did Dalton’s
model of the atom have to be modified to account for
these discoveries?
4. Consider Ernest Rutherford’s a-particle bombardment
experiment illustrated in Fig. 2.12. How did the
results of this experiment lead Rutherford away from
the plum pudding model of the atom to propose the
nuclear model of the atom?
5. Do the proton and the neutron have exactly the same
mass? How do the masses of the proton and neutron
compare to the mass of the electron? Which particles
make the greatest contribution to the mass of an atom?

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in
class.
1. Which of the following is true about an individual atom?
Explain.
a. An individual atom should be considered to be a solid.
b. An individual atom should be considered to be a liquid.
c. An individual atom should be considered to be a gas.

Which particles make the greatest contribution to the
chemical properties of an atom?
6. What is the distinction between atomic number and
mass number? Between mass number and atomic mass?
7. Distinguish between the terms family and period in
connection with the periodic table. For which of these
terms is the term group also used?
8. The compounds AlCl3, CrCl3, and ICl3 have similar
formulas, yet each follows a different set of rules to
name it. Name these compounds, and then compare and
contrast the nomenclature rules used in each case.
9. When metals react with nonmetals, an ionic compound
generally results. What is the predicted general formula
for the compound formed between an alkali metal and
sulfur? Between an alkaline earth metal and nitrogen?
Between aluminum and a halogen?
10. How would you name HBrO4, KIO3, NaBrO2, and
HIO? Refer to Table 2.5 and the acid nomenclature
discussion in the text.

d. The state of the atom depends on which element it is.
e. An individual atom cannot be considered to be a solid,
liquid, or gas.
Justify your choice, and for choices you did not pick, explain
what is wrong with them.
2. How would you go about finding the number of “chalk molecules” it takes to write your name on the board? Provide
an explanation of all you would need to do and a sample
calculation.

3. These questions concern the work of J. J. Thomson.
a. From Thomson’s work, which particles do you think he
would feel are most important for the formation of compounds (chemical changes) and why?
b. Of the remaining two subatomic particles, which do
you place second in importance for forming compounds
and why?
c. Propose three models that explain Thomson’s findings
and evaluate them. To be complete you should include
Thomson’s findings.
4. Heat is applied to an ice cube in a closed container until only
steam is present. Draw a representation of this process, assuming you can see it at an extremely high level of magnification.
What happens to the size of the molecules? What happens to
the total mass of the sample?
5. You have a chemical in a sealed glass container filled with air.
The setup is sitting on a balance as shown below. The chemical is ignited by means of a magnifying glass focusing sunlight on the reactant. After the chemical has completely
burned, which of the following is true? Explain your answer.

250.0 g

a. The balance will read less than 250.0 g.
b. The balance will read 250.0 g.
c. The balance will read greater than 250.0 g.
d. Cannot be determined without knowing the identity of the
chemical.
6. The formula of water is H2O. Which of the following is indicated by this formula? Explain your answer.
a. The mass of hydrogen is twice that of oxygen in each
molecule.
b. There are two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom per
water molecule.
c. The mass of oxygen is twice that of hydrogen in each
molecule.
d. There are two oxygen atoms and one hydrogen atom per
water molecule.
7. You may have noticed that when water boils, you can see bubbles that rise to the surface of the water. Which of the following is inside these bubbles? Explain.
a. air
b. hydrogen and oxygen gas
c. oxygen gas
d. water vapor
e. carbon dioxide gas
8. One of the best indications of a useful theory is that it raises
more questions for further experimentation than it originally
answered. Does this apply to Dalton’s atomic theory? Give
examples.

9. Dalton assumed that all atoms of the same element were identical in all their properties. Explain why this assumption is not
valid.
10. Label each of the following as an atomic element, a molecular
element, or a compound.
a

e

b

f

c

g

d

11. Why is the term “sodium chloride molecule” incorrect
whereas the term “carbon dioxide molecule” is correct?
12. Evaluate each of the following as an acceptable name for
water:
a. dihydrogen oxide
b. hydroxide hydride
c. hydrogen hydroxide
d. oxygen dihydride
13. Why do we call Ba(NO3)2 barium nitrate, but we call Fe(NO3)2
iron(II) nitrate?
14. Why is calcium dichloride not the correct systematic name for
CaCl2?
15. The common name for NH3 is ammonia. What would be the
systematic name for NH3? Support your answer.
16. Which (if any) of the following can be determined by knowing
the number of protons in a neutral element? Explain your
answer.
a. the number of neutrons in the neutral element
b. the number of electrons in the neutral element
c. the name of the element
17. Which of the following explain how an ion is formed? Explain
your answer.
a. adding or subtracting protons to/from an atom
b. adding or subtracting neutrons to/from an atom
c. adding or subtracting electrons to/from an atom
A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to
that question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a
solution appears in the Solutions Guide, as found on the Instructor
Companion Site.

Questions
18. What refinements had to be made in Dalton’s atomic theory to
account for Gay-Lussac’s results on the combining volumes of
gases?
19. When hydrogen is burned in oxygen to form water, the composition of water formed does not depend on the amount of oxygen
reacted. Interpret this in terms of the law of definite proportion.
20. The two most reactive families of elements are the halogens
and the alkali metals. How do they differ in their reactivities?
21. Explain the law of conservation of mass, the law of definite
proportion, and the law of multiple proportions.

For Review

22. Section 2.3 describes the postulates of Dalton’s atomic theory.
With some modifications, these postulates hold up very well
regarding how we view elements, compounds, and chemical
reactions today. Answer the following questions concerning
Dalton’s atomic theory and the modifications made today.
a. The atom can be broken down into smaller parts. What
are the smaller parts?
b. How are atoms of hydrogen identical to each other, and
how can they be different from each other?
c. How are atoms of hydrogen different from atoms of
helium? How can H atoms be similar to He atoms?
d. How is water different from hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
even though both compounds are composed of only
hydrogen and oxygen?
e. What happens in a chemical reaction, and why is mass
conserved in a chemical reaction?
23. The contributions of J. J. Thomson and Ernest Rutherford led
the way to today’s understanding of the structure of the atom.
What were their contributions?
24. What is the modern view of the structure of the atom?
25. The number of protons in an atom determines the identity of
the atom. What does the number and arrangement of the electrons in an atom determine? What does the number of neutrons in an atom determine?
26. If the volume of a proton were similar to the volume of an
electron, how will the densities of these two particles compare
to each other?
27. For lighter, stable isotopes, the ratio of the mass number to the
atomic number is close to a certain value. What is the value?
What happens to the value of the mass number to atomic number ratio as stable isotopes become heavier?
28. List some characteristic properties that distinguish the metallic elements from the nonmetallic elements.
29. Consider the elements of Group 4A (the “carbon family”):
C, Si, Ge, Sn, and Pb. What is the trend in metallic character as
one goes down this group? What is the trend in metallic character going from left to right across a period in the periodic table?
30. Chlorine has two natural isotopes: 37
17 Cl and 17 Cl. Hydrogen
reacts with chlorine to form the compound HCl. Would a
given amount of hydrogen react with different masses of the
two chlorine isotopes? Does this conflict with the law of definite proportion? Why or why not?
31. Before an electrocardiogram (ECG) is recorded for a cardiac
patient, the ECG leads are usually coated with a moist paste
containing sodium chloride. Why is sodium chloride applied
to the leads?
32. Distinguish between the following terms.
a. molecule versus ion
b. covalent bonding versus ionic bonding
c. molecule versus compound
d. anion versus cation
33. Label the type of bonding for each of the following.
a.
b.

34. The vitamin niacin (nicotinic acid, C6H5NO2) can be isolated
from a variety of natural sources such as liver, yeast, milk, and
whole grain. It also can be synthesized from commercially
available materials. From a nutritional point of view, which
source of nicotinic acid is best for use in a multivitamin tablet? Why?
35. Which of the following statements is(are) true? For the false
statements, correct them.
a. Most of the known elements are metals.
b. Element 118 should be a nonmetal.
c. Hydrogen has mostly metallic properties.
d. A family of elements is also known as a period of
elements.
e. When an alkaline earth metal, A, reacts with a halogen, X,
the formula of the covalent compound formed should
be A2X.
36. Each of the following compounds has three possible names
listed for it. For each compound, what is the correct name and
why aren’t the other names used?
a. N2O: nitrogen oxide, nitrogen(I) oxide, dinitrogen
monoxide
b. Cu2O: copper oxide, copper(I) oxide, dicopper monoxide
c. Li2O: lithium oxide, lithium(I) oxide, dilithium monoxide

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Development of the Atomic Theory
37. When mixtures of gaseous H2 and gaseous Cl2 react, a product
forms that has the same properties regardless of the relative
amounts of H2 and Cl2 used.
a. How is this result interpreted in terms of the law of definite proportion?
b. When a volume of H2 reacts with an equal volume of Cl2
at the same temperature and pressure, what volume of
product having the formula HCl is formed?
38. Observations of the reaction between nitrogen gas and hydrogen gas show us that 1 volume of nitrogen reacts with 3 volumes of hydrogen to make 2 volumes of gaseous product, as
shown below:

N N

+

HH HH HH

Determine the formula of the product and justify your answer.
39. A sample of chloroform is found to contain 12.0 g of carbon,
106.4 g of chlorine, and 1.01 g of hydrogen. If a second sample of chloroform is found to contain 30.0 g of carbon, what is
the total mass of chloroform in the second sample?
40. A sample of H2SO4 contains 2.02 g of hydrogen, 32.07 g of
sulfur, and 64.00 g of oxygen. How many grams of sulfur and
grams of oxygen are present in a second sample of H2SO4 containing 7.27 g of hydrogen?

67a

41. Consider 80.0-g samples of two different compounds consisting of only carbon and oxygen. One of the compounds
consists of 21.8 g of carbon, and the other has 34.3 g of carbon. Determine the ratio in whole numbers of the masses of
carbon that combine with 1.00 g of oxygen between the two
compounds.
42. Several compounds containing sulfur and fluorine are known.
Three of them have the following compositions:
i. 1.188 g of F for every 1.000 g of S
ii. 2.375 g of F for every 1.000 g of S
iii. 3.563 g of F for every 1.000 g of S
How do these data illustrate the law of multiple proportions?
43. The three most stable oxides of carbon are carbon monoxide
(CO), carbon dioxide (CO2), and carbon suboxide (C3O2). The
molecules can be represented as

Explain how these molecules illustrate the law of multiple
proportions.
44. Two elements, R and Q, combine to form two binary compounds. In the first compound, 14.0 g of R combines with
3.00 g of Q. In the second compound, 7.00 g of R combines
with 4.50 g of Q. Show that these data are in accord with the
law of multiple proportions. If the formula of the second compound is RQ, what is the formula of the first compound?
45. In Section 1.1 of the text, the concept of a chemical reaction
was introduced with the example of the decomposition of
water, represented as follows:

two water
molecules
written 2H2O

one oxygen molecule
written O2
electric
current

two hydrogen molecules
written 2H2

Use ideas from Dalton’s atomic theory to explain how the above
representation illustrates the law of conservation of mass.
46. In a combustion reaction, 46.0 g of ethanol reacts with 96.0 g
of oxygen to produce water and carbon dioxide. If 54.0 g of
water is produced, what mass of carbon dioxide is produced?
47. Early tables of atomic weights (masses) were generated by
measuring the mass of a substance that reacts with 1.00 g of
oxygen. Given the following data and taking the atomic mass
of hydrogen as 1.00, generate a table of relative atomic masses
for oxygen, sodium, and magnesium.

Element

Mass That Combines
with 1.00 g Oxygen

Assumed
Formula

Hydrogen

0.126 g

HO

Sodium

2.875 g

NaO

Magnesium

1.500 g

MgO

How do your values compare with those in the periodic table?
How do you account for any differences?

48. Indium oxide contains 4.784 g of indium for every 1.000 g of
oxygen. In 1869, when Mendeleev first presented his version
of the periodic table, he proposed the formula In2O3 for indium
oxide. Before that time it was thought that the formula was
InO. What values for the atomic mass of indium are obtained
using these two formulas? Assume that oxygen has an atomic
mass of 16.00.

The Nature of the Atom
49. From the information in this chapter on the mass of the proton,
the mass of the electron, and the sizes of the nucleus and the
atom, calculate the densities of a hydrogen nucleus and a
hydrogen atom.
50. If you wanted to make an accurate scale model of the hydrogen atom and decided that the nucleus would have a diameter
of 1 mm, what would be the diameter of the entire model?
51. In an experiment it was found that the total charge on an oil
drop was 5.93 3 10218 C. How many negative charges does
the drop contain?
52. A chemist in a galaxy far, far away performed the Millikan oil
drop experiment and got the following results for the charges
on various drops. Use these data to calculate the charge of the
electron in zirkombs.
2.56 3 10212 zirkombs
3.84 3 10212 zirkombs

7.68 3 10212 zirkombs
6.40 3 10213 zirkombs

53. Give the names of the metals that correspond to the following
symbols: Sn, Pt, Hg, Mg, K, Ag.
54. What are the symbols of the following nonmetals: fluorine,
chlorine, bromine, sulfur, oxygen, phosphorus?
55. In the periodic table, how many elements are found in each of
the following?
a. Group 2A
b. the oxygen family
c. the nickel group
d. Group 8A
56. In the periodic table, how many elements are found in each of
the following?
a. the halogen family
b. the alkali family
c. the lanthanide series
d. transition metals
57. a. Classify the following elements as metals or nonmetals:
Rn
Si
Mg
Eu
Ge
Ti
Am
B
Au
Br
At
Bi
b. The distinction between metals and nonmetals is really
not a clear one. Some elements, called metalloids, are
intermediate in their properties. Which of these elements
would you reclassify as metalloids? What other elements
in the periodic table would you expect to be metalloids?
58. a. List the noble gas elements. Which of the noble gases has
only radioactive isotopes? (This situation is indicated on
most periodic tables by parentheses around the mass of the
element. See inside front cover.)
b. Which lanthanide element has only radioactive isotopes?

For Review

59. For each of the following sets of elements, label each as either
noble gases, halogens, alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, or
transition metals.
d. Ne, Kr, Xe
a. Ti, Fe, Ag
e. F, Br, I
b. Mg, Sr, Ba
c. Li, K, Rb
60. Identify the elements that correspond to the following atomic
numbers. Label each as either a noble gas, a halogen, an alkali
metal, an alkaline earth metal, a transition metal, a lanthanide
metal, or an actinide metal.
e. 2
a. 17
f. 92
b. 4
g. 55
c. 63
d. 72
61. Write the atomic symbol ( AZX) for each of the following
isotopes.
a. Z 5 8, number of neutrons 5 9
b. the isotope of chlorine in which A 5 37
c. Z 5 27, A 5 60
d. number of protons 5 26, number of neutrons 5 31
e. the isotope of I with a mass number of 131
f. Z 5 3, number of neutrons 5 4
62. Write the atomic symbol ( AZX) for each of the isotopes
described below.
a. number of protons 5 27, number of neutrons 5 31
b. the isotope of boron with mass number 10
c. Z 5 12, A 5 23
d. atomic number 53, number of neutrons 5 79
e. Z 5 20, number of neutrons 5 27
f. number of protons 5 29, mass number 65
63. Write the symbol of each atom using the ZAX format.
Nucleus
11 protons
12 neutrons

67b

Nucleus
8 protons
8 neutrons

8 electrons

c.

64. For carbon-14 and carbon-12, how many protons and neutrons
are in each nucleus? Assuming neutral atoms, how many electrons are present in an atom of carbon-14 and in an atom of
carbon-12?
65. How many protons and neutrons are in the nucleus of each of
the following atoms? In a neutral atom of each element, how
many electrons are present?
a. 79Br
c. 239Pu
e. 3H
b. Br
d.
f. 56Fe
Cs
66. What number of protons and neutrons are contained in the
nucleus of each of the following atoms? Assuming each atom
is uncharged, what number of electrons are present?
a. 235
c. 57
e. 86
92U
26Fe
37Rb
b. 27
d.
f.
13Al
82Pb
20Ca
67. For each of the following ions, indicate the number of protons
and electrons the ion contains.
a. Ba21
d. Rb1
f. Te22
b. Zn
e. Co
g. Br2
c. N
68. How many protons, neutrons, and electrons are in each of the
following atoms or ions?
a. 24
g. 79
d. 59
12Mg
27Co
34Se
b. 12Mg
e. 27Co
h. 28Ni
f. 79
i. 59
c. 59
27Co
34Se
28Ni
69. What is the symbol for an ion with 63 protons, 60 electrons,
and 88 neutrons? If an ion contains 50 protons, 68 neutrons,
and 48 electrons, what is its symbol?
70. What is the symbol of an ion with 16 protons, 18 neutrons, and
18 electrons? What is the symbol for an ion that has 16 protons, 16 neutrons, and 18 electrons?

a.

10 electrons

71. Complete the following table:

Nucleus
9 protons
10 neutrons

Symbol

Number
of Protons
in Nucleus

Number of
Neutrons
in Nucleus

Number of
Electrons

Net
Charge

92 U

39 Y

b.

11 electrons

67c

72. Complete the following table:

Symbol

81. Name each of the following compounds:
a.
O

Number
of Protons
in Nucleus

Number of
Neutrons
in Nucleus

Number of
Electrons

Net
Charge

26 Fe

N

b.

73. Would you expect each of the following atoms to gain or lose
electrons when forming ions? What ion is the most likely in
each case?
a. Ra
c. P
e. Br
b. In
d. Te
f. Rb
74. For each of the following atomic numbers, use the periodic
table to write the formula (including the charge) for the simple
ion that the element is most likely to form in ionic
compounds.
a. 13
c. 56
e. 87
b. 34
d. 7
f. 35

Nomenclature
75. Name the compounds in parts a–d and write the formulas for
the compounds in parts e–h.
a. NaBr
e. strontium fluoride
b. Rb2O
f. aluminum selenide
g. potassium nitride
c. CaS
h. magnesium phosphide
d. AlI3
76. Name the compounds in parts a–d and write the formulas for
the compounds in parts e–h.
a. Hg2O
e. tin(II) nitride
b. FeBr3
f. cobalt(III) iodide
g. mercury(II) oxide
c. CoS
h. chromium(VI) sulfide
d. TiCl4
77. Name each of the following compounds:
a. CsF
d. MnO2
b. Li3N
e. TiO2
c. Ag2S
f. Sr3P2
78. Write the formula for each of the following compounds:
d. aluminum sulfide
a. zinc chloride
e. mercury(I) selenide
b. tin(IV) fluoride
f. silver iodide
c. calcium nitride
79. Name each of the following compounds:
a. BaSO3
c. KMnO4
b. NaNO2
d. K2Cr2O7
80. Write the formula for each of the following compounds:
a. chromium(III) hydroxide
c. lead(IV) carbonate
b. magnesium cyanide
d. ammonium acetate

I
Cl

c. SO2
d. P2S5
82. Write the formula for each of the following compounds:
a. diboron trioxide
b. arsenic pentafluoride
c. dinitrogen monoxide
d. sulfur hexachloride
83. Name each of the following compounds:
a. CuI
f. S4N4
b. CuI2
g. SeCl4
c. CoI2
h. NaOCl
i. BaCrO4
d. Na2CO3
e. NaHCO3
j. NH4NO3
84. Name each of the following compounds. Assume the acids are
dissolved in water.
a. HC2H3O2
g. H2SO4
b. NH4NO2
h. Sr3N2
c. Co2S3
i. Al2(SO3)3
d. ICl
j. SnO2
e. Pb3(PO4)2
k. Na2CrO4
f. KClO3
l. HClO
85. Elements in the same family often form oxyanions of the same
general formula. The anions are named in a similar fashion.
What are the names of the oxyanions of selenium and tellurium: SeO422, SeO322, TeO422, TeO322?
86. Knowing the names of similar chlorine oxyanions and acids,
deduce the names of the following: IO2, IO22, IO32, IO42,
HIO, HIO2, HIO3, HIO4.
87. Write the formula for each of the following compounds:
a. sulfur difluoride
b. sulfur hexafluoride
c. sodium dihydrogen phosphate
d. lithium nitride
e. chromium(III) carbonate
f. tin(II) fluoride
g. ammonium acetate
h. ammonium hydrogen sulfate
i. cobalt(III) nitrate
j. mercury(I) chloride
k. potassium chlorate
l. sodium hydride

