CHAPTER

A high-performance race car uses chemistry for its structure, tires, and fuel.
(© Maria Green/Alamy)

Chemical Foundations
1.1

Chemistry: An Overview
Science: A Process for
Understanding Nature and Its
Changes

1.2

The Scientific Method
Scientific Models

1.3
1.4

Units of Measurement
Uncertainty in Measurement
Precision and Accuracy

1.5
1.6

Significant Figures and Calculations

1.7
1.8
1.9
1.10

Dimensional Analysis
Temperature
Density
Classification of Matter

Learning to Solve Problems
Systematically

W

hen you start your car, do you think about chemistry? Probably not, but
you should. The power to start your car is furnished by a lead storage battery. How does this battery work, and what does it contain? When a battery goes dead,
what does that mean? If you use a friend’s car to “jump-start” your car, did you know
that your battery could explode? How can you avoid such an unpleasant possibility?
What is in the gasoline that you put in your tank, and how does it furnish energy to
your car so that you can drive it to school? What is the vapor that comes out of the
exhaust pipe, and why does it cause air pollution? Your car’s air conditioner might
have a substance in it that is leading to the destruction of the ozone layer in the upper
atmosphere. What are we doing about that? And why is the ozone layer important
anyway?
All of these questions can be answered by understanding some chemistry. In fact,
we’ll consider the answers to all of these questions in this text.
Chemistry is around you all the time. You are able to read and understand this sentence because chemical reactions are occurring in your brain. The food you ate for
breakfast or lunch is now furnishing energy through chemical reactions. Trees and
grass grow because of chemical changes.
Chemistry also crops up in some unexpected places. When archaeologist Luis
Alvarez was studying in college, he probably didn’t realize that the chemical elements
iridium and niobium would make him very famous when they helped him solve the
problem of the disappearing dinosaurs. For decades scientists had wrestled with the
mystery of why the dinosaurs, after ruling the earth for millions of years, suddenly
became extinct 65 million years ago. In studying core samples of rocks dating back to
that period, Alvarez and his coworkers recognized unusual levels of iridium and niobium in these samples—levels much more characteristic of extraterrestrial bodies than
of the earth. Based on these observations, Alvarez hypothesized that a large meteor hit
the earth 65 million years ago, changing atmospheric conditions so much that the
dinosaurs’ food couldn’t grow, and they died—almost instantly in the geologic time
frame.
Chemistry is also important to historians. Did you realize that lead poisoning probably was a significant contributing factor to the decline of the Roman Empire? The
Romans had high exposure to lead from lead-glazed pottery, lead water pipes, and a
sweetening syrup called sapa that was prepared by boiling down grape juice in leadlined vessels. It turns out that one reason for sapa’s sweetness was lead acetate (“sugar
of lead”), which formed as the juice was cooked down. Lead poisoning, with its symptoms of lethargy and mental malfunctions, certainly could have contributed to the
demise of the Roman society.
Chemistry is also apparently very important in determining a person’s behavior.
Various studies have shown that many personality disorders can be linked directly to
imbalances of trace elements in the body. For example, studies on the inmates at Stateville Prison in Illinois have linked low cobalt levels with violent behavior. Lithium
salts have been shown to be very effective in controlling the effects of manic-depressive
disease, and you’ve probably at some time in your life felt a special “chemistry” for
another person. Studies suggest there is literally chemistry going on between two people who are attracted to each other. “Falling in love” apparently causes changes in the
chemistry of the brain; chemicals are produced that give that “high” associated with a
new relationship. Unfortunately, these chemical effects seem to wear off over time,
even if the relationship persists and grows.
The importance of chemistry in the interactions of people should not really surprise
us. We know that insects communicate by emitting and receiving chemical signals via
molecules called pheromones. For example, ants have a very complicated set of chemical signals to signify food sources, danger, and so forth. Also, various female sex

1.1 Chemistry: An Overview

attractants have been isolated and used to lure males into traps to control insect populations. It would not be surprising if humans also emitted chemical signals that we
were not aware of on a conscious level. Thus chemistry is pretty interesting and pretty
important. The main goal of this text is to help you understand the concepts of chemistry so that you can better appreciate the world around you and can be more effective
in whatever career you choose.

1.1 Chemistry: An Overview

Lawrence Livermore Laboratory/Science Source

Geometric and Electronic Properties of Cs Structures on III-V (110)
Surfaces: From 1-D and 2-D Insulators to 3-D Metals by L.J.
Whitman et al. Physical Review Letters 66(10), 1338-1341 (1991).

Since the time of the ancient Greeks, people have wondered about the answer to the
question: What is matter made of? For a long time, humans have believed that matter
is composed of atoms, and in the previous three centuries, we have collected much
indirect evidence to support this belief. Very recently, something exciting has
happened—for the first time we can “see” individual atoms. Of course, we cannot see
atoms with the naked eye; we must use a special microscope called a scanning tunneling microscope (STM). Although we will not consider the details of its operation here,
the STM uses an electron current from a tiny needle to probe the surface of a substance. The STM pictures of several substances are shown in Fig. 1.1. Notice how the
atoms are connected to one another by “bridges,” which, as we will see, represent the
electrons that interconnect atoms.
So, at this point, we are fairly sure that matter consists of individual atoms. The
nature of these atoms is quite complex, and the components of atoms don’t behave
much like the objects we see in the world of our experience. We call this world the
macroscopic world—the world of cars, tables, baseballs, rocks, oceans, and so forth.
One of the main jobs of a scientist is to delve into the macroscopic world and discover its “parts.” For example, when you view a beach from a distance, it looks like
a continuous solid substance. As you get closer, you see that the beach is really made
up of individual grains of sand. As we examine these grains of sand, we find that they
are composed of silicon and oxygen atoms connected to each other to form intricate
shapes (Fig. 1.2). One of the main challenges of chemistry is to understand the connection between the macroscopic world that we experience and the microscopic
world of atoms and molecules. To truly understand chemistry, you must learn to
think on the atomic level. We will spend much time in this text helping you learn to
do that.

FIGURE 1.1 Scanning tunneling
microscope images.

Scanning tunneling microscope image
of DNA.

An image of a chain of cesium atoms on
a gallium arsenide substrate.

Elena Elenathewise/Masterfile. Inset: Jeremy Burgess/Science Source

FIGURE 1.2 Sand on a beach looks
uniform from a distance, but up close
the irregular sand grains are visible, and
each grain is composed of tiny atoms.

O
Si

CRITICAL THINKING The scanning tunneling microscope allows
us to “see” atoms. What if you were sent back in time before the invention of the
scanning tunneling microscope? What evidence could you give to support the
theory that all matter is made of atoms and molecules?

One of the amazing things about our universe is that the tremendous variety of
substances we find there results from only about 100 different kinds of atoms. You can
think of these approximately 100 atoms as the letters in an alphabet from which all the
“words” in the universe are made. It is the way the atoms are organized in a given
substance that determines the properties of that substance. For example, water, one of
the most common and important substances on the earth, is composed of two types of
atoms: hydrogen and oxygen. Two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom are bound
together to form the water molecule:
oxygen atom

water molecule

hydrogen atom

When an electric current passes through it, water is decomposed to hydrogen and oxygen. These chemical elements themselves exist naturally as diatomic (two-atom)
molecules:
oxygen molecule

written O2

hydrogen molecule

written H2

We can represent the decomposition of water to its component elements, hydrogen and
oxygen, as follows:

two water
molecules
written 2H2O

one oxygen molecule
written O2
electric
current

two hydrogen molecules
written 2H2

1.2 The Scientific Method

Notice that it takes two molecules of water to furnish the right number of oxygen and
hydrogen atoms to allow for the formation of the two-atom molecules. This reaction
explains why the battery in your car can explode if you jump-start it improperly. When
you hook up the jumper cables, current flows through the dead battery, which contains
water (and other things), and causes hydrogen and oxygen to form by decomposition
of some of the water. A spark can cause this accumulated hydrogen and oxygen to
explode, forming water again.
O2
spark

2H2O

2H2

This example illustrates two of the fundamental concepts of chemistry: (1) Matter is
composed of various types of atoms, and (2) one substance changes to another by
reorganizing the way the atoms are attached to each other.
These are core ideas of chemistry, and we will have much more to say about them.

Science: A Process for Understanding
Nature and Its Changes
How do you tackle the problems that confront you in real life? Think about your trip
to school. If you live in a city, traffic is undoubtedly a problem you confront daily. How
do you decide the best way to drive to school? If you are new in town, you first get a
map and look at the possible ways to make the trip. Then you might collect information about the advantages and disadvantages of various routes from people who know
the area. Based on this information, you probably try to predict the best route. However, you can find the best route only by trying several of them and comparing the
results. After a few experiments with the various possibilities, you probably will be
able to select the best way. What you are doing in solving this everyday problem is
applying the same process that scientists use to study nature. The first thing you did
was collect relevant data. Then you made a prediction, and then you tested it by trying
it out. This process contains the fundamental elements of science:
1. Making observations (collecting data)
2. Suggesting a possible explanation (formulating a hypothesis)
3. Doing experiments to test the possible explanation (testing the hypothesis)
Scientists call this process the scientific method. We will discuss it in more detail in the
next section. One of life’s most important activities is solving problems—not “plug and
chug” exercises, but real problems—problems that have new facets to them, that involve
things you may have never confronted before. The more creative you are at solving these
problems, the more effective you will be in your career and your personal life. Part of the
reason for learning chemistry, therefore, is to become a better problem solver. Chemists
are usually excellent problem solvers because to master chemistry, you have to master
the scientific approach. Chemical problems are frequently very complicated—there is
usually no neat and tidy solution. Often it is difficult to know where to begin.

1.2 The Scientific Method
Science is a framework for gaining and organizing knowledge. Science is not simply a
set of facts but also a plan of action—a procedure for processing and understanding
certain types of information. Scientific thinking is useful in all aspects of life, but in
this text we will use it to understand how the chemical world operates. As we said in

our previous discussion, the process that lies at the center of scientific inquiry is called
the scientific method. There are actually many scientific methods, depending on the
nature of the specific problem under study and the particular investigator involved.
However, it is useful to consider the following general framework for a generic scientific method (Fig. 1.3):

Observation
Hypothesis
Experiment

Steps in the Scientific Method
Theory (model)

Theory
modified
as needed

1. Making observations. Observations may be qualitative (the sky is blue; water is a
liquid) or quantitative (water boils at 1008C; a certain chemistry book weighs 2 kg).
A qualitative observation does not involve a number. A quantitative observation
(called a measurement) involves both a number and a unit.

Prediction

2. Formulating hypotheses. A hypothesis is a possible explanation for an observation.

Experiment

3. Performing experiments. An experiment is carried out to test a hypothesis. This involves
gathering new information that enables a scientist to decide whether the hypothesis is
valid—that is, whether it is supported by the new information learned from the experiment. Experiments always produce new observations, and this brings the process back
to the beginning again.

FIGURE 1.3 The fundamental steps
of the scientific method.

To understand a given phenomenon, these steps are repeated many times, gradually
accumulating the knowledge necessary to provide a possible explanation of the
phenomenon.

Scientific Models

Observation
Hypothesis
Experiment

Theory
(model)
Theory
modified
as needed

Law

Prediction

Experiment

FIGURE 1.4 The various parts of
the scientific method.

Once a set of hypotheses that agrees with the various observations is obtained, the
hypotheses are assembled into a theory. A theory, which is often called a model, is a set
of tested hypotheses that gives an overall explanation of some natural phenomenon.
It is very important to distinguish between observations and theories. An observation is something that is witnessed and can be recorded. A theory is an interpretation—
a possible explanation of why nature behaves in a particular way. Theories inevitably
change as more information becomes available. For example, the motions of the sun
and stars have remained virtually the same over the thousands of years during which
humans have been observing them, but our explanations—our theories—for these
motions have changed greatly since ancient times.
The point is that scientists do not stop asking questions just because a given theory
seems to account satisfactorily for some aspect of natural behavior. They continue
doing experiments to refine or replace the existing theories. This is generally done by
using the currently accepted theory to make a prediction and then performing an experiment (making a new observation) to see whether the results bear out this prediction.
Always remember that theories (models) are human inventions. They represent
attempts to explain observed natural behavior in terms of human experiences. A theory
is actually an educated guess. We must continue to do experiments and to refine our
theories (making them consistent with new knowledge) if we hope to approach a more
complete understanding of nature.
As scientists observe nature, they often see that the same observation applies to
many different systems. For example, studies of innumerable chemical changes have
shown that the total observed mass of the materials involved is the same before and after
the change. Such generally observed behavior is formulated into a statement called a
natural law. For example, the observation that the total mass of materials is not affected
by a chemical change in those materials is called the law of conservation of mass.
Note the difference between a natural law and a theory. A natural law is a summary of observed (measurable) behavior, whereas a theory is an explanation of
behavior. A law summarizes what happens; a theory (model) is an attempt to
explain why it happens.

1.2 The Scientific Method

CHEMICAL CONNECTIONS

P

ost-it Notes, a product of the 3M
Corporation, revolutionized casual
written communications and personal
reminders. Introduced in the United
States in 1980, these sticky-but-not-toosticky notes have now found countless
uses in offices, cars, and homes
throughout the world.
The invention of sticky notes
occurred over a period of about 10 years
and involved a great deal of serendipity.
The adhesive for Post-it Notes was discovered by Dr. Spencer F. Silver of 3M in
1968. Silver found that when an acrylate
polymer material was made in a particular way, it formed cross-linked microspheres. When suspended in a solvent
and sprayed on a sheet of paper, this
substance formed a “sparse monolayer”
of adhesive after the solvent evaporated.
Scanning electron microscope images of
the adhesive show that it has an irregular
surface, a little like the surface of a gravel
road. In contrast, the adhesive on cellophane tape looks smooth and uniform,
like a superhighway. The bumpy surface
of Silver’s adhesive caused it to be sticky
but not so sticky to produce permanent
adhesion, because the number of contact points between the binding surfaces was limited.
When he invented this adhesive,
Silver had no specific ideas for its use, so

he spread the word of his discovery
to his fellow employees at 3M to
see if anyone had an application for
it. In addition, over the next several
years development was carried out
to improve the adhesive’s properties. It was not until 1974 that the
idea for Post-it Notes popped up.
One Sunday, Art Fry, a chemical
engineer for 3M, was singing in his
church choir when he became
annoyed that the bookmark in his
hymnal kept falling out. He
thought to himself that it would be
nice if the bookmark were sticky
enough to stay in place but not so
sticky that it couldn’t be moved. Luckily,
he remembered Silver’s glue—and the
Post-it Note was born.
For the next three years, Fry worked
to overcome the manufacturing obstacles associated with the product. By
1977 enough Post-it Notes were being
produced to supply 3M’s corporate
headquarters, where the employees
quickly became addicted to their many
uses. Post-it Notes are now available in
62 colors and 25 shapes.
In the years since the introduction of
Post-it Notes, 3M has heard some
remarkable stories connected to the use
of these notes. For example, a Post-it
Note was applied to the nose of a

Photo © Cengage Learning. All rights reserved.

A Note-able Achievement

corporate jet, where it was intended to
be read by the plane’s Las Vegas ground
crew. Someone forgot to remove it,
however. The note was still on the nose
of the plane when it landed in Minneapolis, having survived a takeoff, a landing, and speeds of 500 miles per hour at
temperatures as low as 2568F. Stories on
the 3M website describe how a Post-it
Note on the front door of a home survived the 140-mile-per-hour winds of
Hurricane Hugo and how a foreign
official accepted Post-it Notes in lieu of
cash when a small bribe was needed to
cut through bureaucratic hassles.
Post-it Notes have definitely
changed the way we communicate and
remember things.

In this section we have described the scientific method as it might ideally be applied
(Fig. 1.4). However, it is important to remember that science does not always progress
smoothly and efficiently. For one thing, hypotheses and observations are not totally
independent of each other, as we have assumed in the description of the idealized scientific method. The coupling of observations and hypotheses occurs because once we
begin to proceed down a given theoretical path, our hypotheses are unavoidably
couched in the language of that theory. In other words, we tend to see what we expect
to see and often fail to notice things that we do not expect. Thus the theory we are testing helps us because it focuses our questions. However, at the same time, this focusing
process may limit our ability to see other possible explanations.
It is also important to keep in mind that scientists are human. They have prejudices;
they misinterpret data; they become emotionally attached to their theories and thus lose
objectivity; and they play politics. Science is affected by profit motives, budgets, fads,
wars, and religious beliefs. Galileo, for example, was forced to recant his astronomical

© Devonshire Collection/Reproduced by permission of Chatsworth Settlement Trustees/
The Bridgeman Art Library

◀
Robert Boyle (1627–1691) was born in Ireland. He became especially interested in experiments
involving air and developed an air pump with which he produced evacuated cylinders. He used
these cylinders to show that a feather and a lump of lead fall at the same rate in the absence of
air resistance and that sound cannot be produced in a vacuum. His most famous experiments
involved careful measurements of the volume of a gas as a function of pressure. In his book
Boyle urged that the ancient view of elements as mystical substances should be abandoned and
that an element should instead be defined as anything that cannot be broken down into simpler
substances. This concept was an important step in the development of modern chemistry.

observations in the face of strong religious resistance. Lavoisier, the father of modern
chemistry, was beheaded because of his political affiliations. Great progress in the chemistry of nitrogen fertilizers resulted from the desire to produce explosives to fight wars. The
progress of science is often affected more by the frailties of humans and their institutions
than by the limitations of scientific measuring devices. The scientific methods are only as
effective as the humans using them. They do not automatically lead to progress.
CRITICAL THINKING What if everyone in the government used
the scientific method to analyze and solve society’s problems, and politics were
never involved in the solutions? How would this be different from the present
situation, and would it be better or worse?

1.3 Units of Measurement

Photo © Cengage Learning. All rights reserved.

Making observations is fundamental to all science. A quantitative observation, or measurement, always consists of two parts: a number and a scale (called a unit). Both parts
must be present for the measurement to be meaningful.
In this textbook we will use measurements of mass, length, time, temperature, electric
current, and the amount of a substance, among others. Scientists recognized long ago
that standard systems of units had to be adopted if measurements were to be useful. If
every scientist had a different set of units, complete chaos would result. Unfortunately,
different standards were adopted in different parts of the world. The two major systems
are the English system used in the United States and the metric system used by most of
the rest of the industrialized world. This duality causes a good deal of trouble; for example, parts as simple as bolts are not interchangeable between machines built using the
two systems. As a result, the United States has begun to adopt the metric system.
Most scientists in all countries have used the metric system for many years. In 1960,
an international agreement set up a system of units called the International System (le
Système International in French), or the SI system. This system is based on the metric
system and units derived from the metric system. The fundamental SI units are listed in
Table 1.1. We will discuss how to manipulate these units later in this chapter.

▲
Soda is commonly sold in 2-L bottles—
an example of the use of SI units in
everyday life.

TABLE 1.1 | Fundamental SI Units
Physical Quantity

Name of Unit

Abbreviation

Mass

kilogram

kg

Length

meter

m

Time

second

s

Temperature

kelvin

K

Electric current

ampere

A

Amount of substance

mole

mol

Luminous intensity

candela

cd

1.3 Units of Measurement

TABLE 1.2 | Prefixes Used in the SI System (The most commonly

TABLE 1.3 | Some Examples of

encountered are shown in blue.)

Commonly Used Units
Exponential
Notation*

Prefix

Symbol

Meaning

exa

E

1,000,000,000,000,000,000

peta

P

1,000,000,000,000,000

tera

T

1,000,000,000,000

giga

G

1,000,000,000

mega

M

1,000,000

kilo

k

1,000

hecto

h

deka

da

—

—

deci

d

0.1

centi

c

0.01

milli

m

0.001

micro

m

0.000001

nano

n

0.000000001

pico

p

0.000000000001

10212

femto

f

0.000000000000001

10215

atto

a

0.000000000000000001

10218

Length

A dime is 1 mm thick.
A quarter is 2.5 cm in
diameter.
The average height of an
adult man is 1.8 m.

Mass

A nickel has a mass of
about 5 g.
A 120-lb person has a
mass of about 55 kg.

Volume

A 12-oz can of soda has a
volume of about 360 mL.

*See Appendix 1.1 if you need a review of exponential notation.

Because the fundamental units are not always convenient (expressing the mass of a
pin in kilograms is awkward), prefixes are used to change the size of the unit. These
are listed in Table 1.2. Some common objects and their measurements in SI units are
listed in Table 1.3.
One physical quantity that is very important in chemistry is volume, which is not
a fundamental SI unit but is derived from length. A cube that measures 1 meter (m)
on each edge is represented in Fig. 1.5. This cube has a volume of (1 m)3 5 1 m3.

1 m3

1 dm3 = 1 L

FIGURE 1.5 The largest cube has
sides 1 m in length and a volume of 1 m3.
The middle-sized cube has sides 1 dm in
length and a volume of 1 dm3, or 1 L. The
smallest cube has sides 1 cm in length
and a volume of 1 cm3, or 1 mL.

1 cm

1 cm

1 cm3 = 1 mL

Recognizing that there are 10 decimeters (dm) in a meter, the volume of this cube is
(1 m)3 5 (10 dm)3 5 1000 dm3. A cubic decimeter, that is, (1 dm)3, is commonly
called a liter (L), which is a unit of volume slightly larger than a quart. As shown in
Fig. 1.5, 1000 L is contained in a cube with a volume of 1 cubic meter. Similarly,
since 1 decimeter equals 10 centimeters (cm), the liter can be divided into 1000 cubes,
each with a volume of 1 cubic centimeter:
1 L 5 11 dm2 3 5 110 cm2 3 5 1000 cm3

Also, since 1 cm3 5 1 milliliter (mL),
1 L 5 1000 cm3 5 1000 mL
Thus 1 liter contains 1000 cubic centimeters, or 1000 milliliters.
Chemical laboratory work frequently requires measurement of the volumes of liquids.
Several devices for the accurate determination of liquid volume are shown in Fig. 1.6.
An important point concerning measurements is the relationship between mass and
weight. Although these terms are sometimes used interchangeably, they are not the
same. Mass is a measure of the resistance of an object to a change in its state of motion.
Mass is measured by the force necessary to give an object a certain acceleration. On the

CHEMICAL CONNECTIONS
Critical Units!
ow important are conversions from
one unit to another? If you ask the
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), very important!
In 1999, NASA lost a $125 million Mars
Climate Orbiter because of a failure to
convert from English to metric units.
The problem arose because two
teams working on the Mars mission
were using different sets of units.
NASA’s scientists at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory in Pasadena, California,
assumed that the thrust data for the
rockets on the Orbiter they received
from Lockheed Martin Astronautics in
Denver, which built the spacecraft,
were in metric units. In reality, the units
were English. As a result, the Orbiter
dipped 100 km lower into the Mars
atmosphere than planned, and the
friction from the atmosphere caused
the craft to burn up.
NASA’s mistake refueled the controversy over whether Congress should
require the United States to switch to
the metric system. About 95% of the
world now uses the metric system, and
the United States is slowly switching

NASA

H

Artist’s conception of the lost Mars Climate Orbiter.
from English to metric. For example,
the automobile industry has adopted
metric fasteners, and we buy our soda
in 2-L bottles.
Units can be very important. In fact,
they can mean the difference between
life and death on some occasions. In

1983, for example, a Canadian jetliner
almost ran out of fuel when someone
pumped 22,300 lb of fuel into the
aircraft instead of 22,300 kg. Remember
to watch your units!

1.4 Uncertainty in Measurement
FIGURE 1.6 Common types of
laboratory equipment used to measure
liquid volume.

Calibration
mark indicates
25-mL volume

mL

mL

Valve
(stopcock)
controls the
liquid flow

100-mL
graduated cylinder

mL

25-mL pipet

Calibration
mark indicates
250-mL volume

50-mL buret

250-mL
volumetric flask

earth we use the force that gravity exerts on an object to measure its mass. We call this
force the object’s weight. Since weight is the response of mass to gravity, it varies with
the strength of the gravitational field. Therefore, your body mass is the same on the
earth and on the moon, but your weight would be much less on the moon than on the
earth because of the moon’s smaller gravitational field.
Because weighing something on a chemical balance involves comparing the mass
of that object to a standard mass, the terms weight and mass are sometimes used interchangeably, although this is incorrect.

CRITICAL THINKING What if you were not allowed to use units
for one day? How would this affect your life for that day?

1.4 Uncertainty in Measurement

The number associated with a measurement is obtained using some measuring device.
For example, consider the measurement of the volume of a liquid using a buret (shown
in Fig. 1.7 with the scale greatly magnified). Notice that the meniscus of the liquid
occurs at about 20.15 mL. This means that about 20.15 mL of liquid has been delivered
from the buret (if the initial position of the liquid meniscus was 0.00 mL). Note that
we must estimate the last number of the volume reading by interpolating between the
0.1-mL marks. Since the last number is estimated, its value may be different if another
person makes the same measurement. If five different people read the same volume,
the results might be as follows:

FIGURE 1.7 Measurement of
volume using a buret. The volume is
read at the bottom of the liquid curve
(called the meniscus).

Person

Results of Measurement

20.15 mL

20.14 mL

20.16 mL

20.17 mL

20.16 mL

A measurement always has some degree of
uncertainty.

Uncertainty in measurement is discussed
in more detail in Appendix 1.5.

EXAMPLE 1.1

These results show that the first three numbers (20.1) remain the same regardless of
who makes the measurement; these are called certain digits. However, the digit to the
right of the 1 must be estimated and therefore varies; it is called an uncertain digit. We
customarily report a measurement by recording all the certain digits plus the first
uncertain digit. In our example it would not make any sense to try to record the volume
to thousandths of a milliliter because the value for hundredths of a milliliter must be
estimated when using the buret.
It is very important to realize that a measurement always has some degree of uncertainty. The uncertainty of a measurement depends on the precision of the measuring
device. For example, using a bathroom scale, you might estimate the mass of a grapefruit to be approximately 1.5 lb. Weighing the same grapefruit on a highly precise
balance might produce a result of 1.476 lb. In the first case, the uncertainty occurs in
the tenths of a pound place; in the second case, the uncertainty occurs in the thousandths of a pound place. Suppose we weigh two similar grapefruits on the two devices
and obtain the following results:
Bathroom Scale

Balance

Grapefruit 1

1.5 lb

1.476 lb

Grapefruit 2

1.5 lb

1.518 lb

Do the two grapefruits have the same mass? The answer depends on which set of results
you consider. Thus a conclusion based on a series of measurements depends on the
certainty of those measurements. For this reason, it is important to indicate the uncertainty in any measurement. This is done by always recording the certain digits and the
first uncertain digit (the estimated number). These numbers are called the significant
figures of a measurement.
The convention of significant figures automatically indicates something about the
uncertainty in a measurement. The uncertainty in the last number (the estimated number) is usually assumed to be 61 unless otherwise indicated. For example, the measurement 1.86 kg can be taken to mean 1.86 6 0.01 kg.

Uncertainty in Measurement
In analyzing a sample of polluted water, a chemist measured out a 25.00-mL water
sample with a pipet (see Fig. 1.6). At another point in the analysis, the chemist used a
graduated cylinder (see Fig. 1.6) to measure 25 mL of a solution. What is the difference between the measurements 25.00 mL and 25 mL?

SOLUTION

Even though the two volume measurements appear to be equal, they really convey
different information. The quantity 25 mL means that the volume is between 24 mL
and 26 mL, whereas the quantity 25.00 mL means that the volume is between
24.99 mL and 25.01 mL. The pipet measures volume with much greater precision than
does the graduated cylinder.
See Exercise 1.37

When making a measurement, it is important to record the results to the appropriate
number of significant figures. For example, if a certain buret can be read to 60.01 mL,
you should record a reading of twenty-five milliliters as 25.00 mL, not 25 mL. This
way at some later time when you are using your results to do calculations, the uncertainty in the measurement will be known to you.

1.4 Uncertainty in Measurement

Precision and Accuracy
Two terms often used to describe the reliability of measurements are precision and
accuracy. Although these words are frequently used interchangeably in everyday life,
they have different meanings in the scientific context. Accuracy refers to the agreement of a particular value with the true value. Precision refers to the degree of agreement among several measurements of the same quantity. Precision reflects the
reproducibility of a given type of measurement. The difference between these terms is
illustrated by the results of three different dart throws shown in Fig. 1.8.
Two different types of errors are illustrated in Fig. 1.8. A random error (also called
an indeterminate error) means that a measurement has an equal probability of being
high or low. This type of error occurs in estimating the value of the last digit of a measurement. The second type of error is called systematic error (or determinate error).
This type of error occurs in the same direction each time; it is either always high or
always low. Fig. 1.8(a) indicates large random errors (poor technique). Fig. 1.8(b)
indicates small random errors but a large systematic error, and Fig. 1.8(c) indicates
small random errors and no systematic error.
In quantitative work, precision is often used as an indication of accuracy; we assume
that the average of a series of precise measurements (which should “average out” the
random errors because of their equal probability of being high or low) is accurate, or
close to the “true” value. However, this assumption is valid only if systematic errors
are absent. Suppose we weigh a piece of brass five times on a very precise balance and
obtain the following results:
Weighing

Result

2.486 g

2.487 g

2.485 g

2.484 g

2.488 g

Normally, we would assume that the true mass of the piece of brass is very close to
2.486 g, which is the average of the five results:
2.486 g 1 2.487 g 1 2.485 g 1 2.484 g 1 2.488 g
5 2.486 g
However, if the balance has a defect causing it to give a result that is consistently
1.000 g too high (a systematic error of 11.000 g), then the measured value of 2.486 g
would be seriously in error. The point here is that high precision among several measurements is an indication of accuracy only if systematic errors are absent.

FIGURE 1.8 The
results of several dart
throws show the
difference between
precise and accurate.

a
Neither accurate nor precise.

b
Precise but not accurate.

c
Accurate and precise.

EXAMPLE 1.2

Precision and Accuracy
To check the accuracy of a graduated cylinder, a student filled the cylinder to the
25-mL mark using water delivered from a buret (see Fig. 1.6) and then read the volume
delivered. Following are the results of five trials:

Trial

Volume Shown by
Graduated Cylinder

Volume Shown
by the Buret

25 mL

26.54 mL

25 mL

26.51 mL

25 mL

26.60 mL

25 mL

26.49 mL

25 mL

26.57 mL

Average

25 mL

26.54 mL

Is the graduated cylinder accurate?
SOLUTION
Precision is an indication of accuracy only if
there are no systematic errors.

The results of the trials show very good precision (for a graduated cylinder). The student
has good technique. However, note that the average value measured using the buret is significantly different from 25 mL. Thus this graduated cylinder is not very accurate. It produces a systematic error (in this case, the indicated result is low for each measurement).
See Question 1.11

1.5 Significant Figures
and Calculations
Calculating the final result for an experiment usually involves adding, subtracting,
multiplying, or dividing the results of various types of measurements. Since it is very
important that the uncertainty in the final result is known correctly, we have developed
rules for counting the significant figures in each number and for determining the correct number of significant figures in the final result.

Rules for Counting Significant Figures
1. Nonzero integers. Nonzero integers always count as significant figures.
2. Zeros. There are three classes of zeros:
Leading zeros are never significant figures.

a. Leading zeros are zeros that precede all the nonzero digits. These do not count as
significant figures. In the number 0.0025, the three zeros simply indicate the position
of the decimal point. This number has only two significant figures.

Captive zeros are always significant figures.

b. Captive zeros are zeros between nonzero digits. These always count as significant
figures. The number 1.008 has four significant figures.

Trailing zeros are sometimes significant
figures.

c. Trailing zeros are zeros at the right end of the number. They are significant only if the
number contains a decimal point. The number 100 has only one significant figure,
whereas the number 1.00 3 102 has three significant figures. The number one
hundred written as 100. also has three significant figures.

(Box continues on following page)

1.5 Significant Figures and Calculations

Exact numbers never limit the number of
significant figures in a calculation.

Exponential notation is reviewed in
Appendix 1.1.

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 1.3

3. Exact numbers. Many times calculations involve numbers that were not obtained
using measuring devices but were determined by counting: 10 experiments, 3 apples,
8 molecules. Such numbers are called exact numbers. They can be assumed to have an
infinite number of significant figures. Other examples of exact numbers are the 2 in 2pr
(the circumference of a circle) and the 4 and the 3 in 43 pr3 (the volume of a sphere).
Exact numbers also can arise from definitions. For example, 1 inch is defined as exactly
2.54 centimeters. Thus, in the statement 1 in 5 2.54 cm, neither the 2.54 nor the 1 limits
the number of significant figures when used in a calculation.

Note that the number 1.00 3 102 on the previous page is written in exponential
notation. This type of notation has at least two advantages: The number of significant
figures can be easily indicated, and fewer zeros are needed to write a very large or
very small number. For example, the number 0.000060 is much more conveniently
represented as 6.0 3 1025 (the number has two significant figures).

Significant Figures
Give the number of significant figures for each of the following results.
a. A student’s extraction procedure on tea yields 0.0105 g of caffeine.
b. A chemist records a mass of 0.050080 g in an analysis.
c. In an experiment a span of time is determined to be 8.050 3 1023 s.

SOLUTION

a. The number contains three significant figures. The zeros to the left of the 1 are leading
zeros and are not significant, but the remaining zero (a captive zero) is significant.
b. The number contains five significant figures. The leading zeros (to the left of the
5) are not significant. The captive zeros between the 5 and the 8 are significant,
and the trailing zero to the right of the 8 is significant because the number contains a decimal point.
c. This number has four significant figures. Both zeros are significant.
See Exercises 1.32 through 1.34

To this point we have learned to count the significant figures in a given number.
Next, we must consider how uncertainty accumulates as calculations are carried out.
The detailed analysis of the accumulation of uncertainties depends on the type of calculation involved and can be complex. However, in this textbook we will use the following simple rules that have been developed for determining the appropriate number
of significant figures in the result of a calculation.

Rules for Significant Figures in Mathematical Operations
1. For multiplication or division, the number of significant figures in the result is the same as
the number in the least precise measurement used in the calculation. For example,
consider the calculation
Corrected
4.56 3 1.4 5 6.38 8888888n
↑
Limiting term has
two significant
figures

6.4

↑
Two significant
figures

The product should have only two significant figures, since 1.4 has two significant figures.

(Box continues on following page)

2. For addition or subtraction, the result has the same number of decimal places as the least
precise measurement used in the calculation. For example, consider the sum

12.11
18.0
← Limiting term has one decimal place
1.013
Corrected
31.123 8888888n
31.1
↑
One decimal place

The correct result is 31.1, since 18.0 has only one decimal place.

Note that for multiplication and division, significant figures are counted. For addition and subtraction, the decimal places are counted.
In most calculations you will need to round numbers to obtain the correct number
of significant figures. The following rules should be applied when rounding.

Rules for Rounding
1. In a series of calculations, carry the extra digits through to the final result, then round.
2. If the digit to be removed
a. is less than 5, the preceding digit stays the same. For example, 1.33 rounds to 1.3.
Rule 2 is consistent with the operation of
electronic calculators.

b. is equal to or greater than 5, the preceding digit is increased by 1. For example, 1.36
rounds to 1.4.

Although rounding is generally straightforward, one point requires special emphasis. As an illustration, suppose that the number 4.348 needs to be rounded to two significant figures. In doing this, we look only at the first number to the right of the 3:
4.348

↑
Look at this number to
round to two significant figures.
Do not round sequentially. The number
6.8347 rounded to three significant figures
is 6.83, not 6.84.

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 1.4

The number is rounded to 4.3 because 4 is less than 5. It is incorrect to round sequentially.
For example, do not round the 4 to 5 to give 4.35 and then round the 3 to 4 to give 4.4.
When rounding, use only the first number to the right of the last significant figure.
It is important to note that Rule 1 above usually will not be followed in the examples in this text because we want to show the correct number of significant figures in
each step of a problem. This same practice is followed for the detailed solutions given
in the Solutions Guide. However, when you are doing problems, you should carry extra
digits throughout a series of calculations and round to the correct number of significant
figures only at the end. This is the practice you should follow. The fact that your rounding procedures are different from those used in this text must be taken into account
when you check your answer with the one given at the end of the book or in the Solutions Guide. Your answer (based on rounding only at the end of a calculation) may
differ in the last place from that given here as the “correct” answer because we have
rounded after each step. To help you understand the difference between these rounding
procedures, we will consider them further in Example 1.4.

Significant Figures in Mathematical Operations
Carry out the following mathematical operations, and give each result with the correct
number of significant figures.
a. 1.05 3 1023 4 6.135
b. 21 2 13.8

1.5 Significant Figures and Calculations

c. As part of a lab assignment to determine the value of the gas constant (R), a student measured the pressure (P), volume (V ), and temperature (T) for a sample of
gas, where
R5

PV
T

The following values were obtained: P 5 2.560, T 5 275.15, and V 5 8.8. (Gases
will be discussed in detail in Chapter 5; we will not be concerned at this time about
the units for these quantities.) Calculate R to the correct number of significant
figures.
SOLUTION

a. The result is 1.71 3 1024, which has three significant figures because the term with
the least precision (1.05 3 1023) has three significant figures.
b. The result is 7 with no decimal point because the number with the least number
of decimal places (21) has none.
12.5602 18.82
PV
c. R 5
T
275.15
The correct procedure for obtaining the final result can be represented as follows:
12.5602 18.82
22.528
5 0.0818753
275.15
275.15

5 0.082 5 8.2 3 1022 5 R
The final result must be rounded to two significant figures because 8.8 (the least precise measurement) has two significant figures. To show the effects of rounding at intermediate steps, we will carry out the calculation as follows:
Rounded to two
significant figures
↓

12.5602 18.82
22.528
275.15
275.15
275.15
Now we proceed with the next calculation:
5 0.0835908
275.15
Rounded to two significant figures, this result is
0.084 5 8.4 3 1022

Photo © Cengage Learning

Note that intermediate rounding gives a significantly different result than that obtained
by rounding only at the end. Again, we must reemphasize that in your calculations you
should round only at the end. However, because rounding is carried out at intermediate
steps in this text (to always show the correct number of significant figures), the final
answer given in the text may differ slightly from the one you obtain (rounding only at
the end).

▲
This number must be rounded to two
significant figures.

See Exercises 1.39 through 1.42

There is a useful lesson to be learned from Part c of Example 1.4. The student measured the pressure and temperature to greater precision than the volume. A more precise value of R (one with more significant figures) could have been obtained if a more
precise measurement of V had been made. As it is, the efforts expended to measure
P and T very precisely were wasted. Remember that a series of measurements to obtain
some final result should all be done to about the same precision.

1.6 Learning to Solve Problems
Systematically
One of the main activities in learning chemistry is solving various types of problems.
The best way to approach a problem, whether it is a chemistry problem or one from
your daily life, is to ask questions such as the following:
1. What is my goal? Or you might phrase it as: Where am I going?
2. Where am I starting? Or you might phrase it as: What do I know?
3. How do I proceed from where I start to where I want to go? Or you might say:
How do I get there?
We will use these ideas as we consider unit conversions in this chapter. Then we will
have much more to say about problem solving in Chapter 3, where we will start to
consider more complex problems.

1.7 Dimensional Analysis

TABLE 1.4 | English–Metric
Equivalents
Length

1 m 5 1.094 yd
2.54 cm 5 1 in

Mass

1 kg 5 2.205 lb
453.6 g 5 1 lb

Volume

1 L 5 1.06 qt
1 ft3 5 28.32 L

It is often necessary to convert a given result from one system of units to another. The
best way to do this is by a method called the unit factor method or, more commonly,
dimensional analysis. To illustrate the use of this method, we will consider several
unit conversions. Some equivalents in the English and metric systems are listed in
Table 1.4. A more complete list of conversion factors given to more significant figures
appears in Appendix 6.
Consider a pin measuring 2.85 cm in length. What is its length in inches? To accomplish this conversion, we must use the equivalence statement
2.54 cm 5 1 in
If we divide both sides of this equation by 2.54 cm, we get

1 in
2.54 cm

This expression is called a unit factor. Since 1 inch and 2.54 cm are exactly equivalent,
multiplying any expression by this unit factor will not change its value.
The pin has a length of 2.85 cm. Multiplying this length by the appropriate unit
factor gives
2.85 cm 3

1 in
2.85
in 5 1.12 in
2.54 cm
2.54

Note that the centimeter units cancel to give inches for the result. This is exactly what
we wanted to accomplish. Note also that the result has three significant figures, as
required by the number 2.85. Recall that the 1 and 2.54 in the conversion factor are
exact numbers by definition.
INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 1.5

Unit Conversions I
A pencil is 7.00 in long. What is its length in centimeters?

SOLUTION

Where are we going?
To convert the length of the pencil from inches to centimeters
What do we know?
❯ The pencil is 7.00 in long.

1.7 Dimensional Analysis

How do we get there?
Since we want to convert from inches to centimeters, we need the equivalence state2.54 cm
ment 2.54 cm 5 1 in. The correct unit factor in this case is
:
1 in
7.00 in 3

2.54 cm
5 17.002 12.542 cm 5 17.8 cm
1 in

Here the inch units cancel, leaving centimeters, as requested.
See Exercises 1.43 and 1.44

Note that two unit factors can be derived from each equivalence statement. For
example, from the equivalence statement 2.54 cm 5 1 in, the two unit factors are
2.54 cm
1 in
Consider the direction of the required
change to select the correct unit factor.

and

1 in
2.54 cm

How do you choose which one to use in a given situation? Simply look at the direction
of the required change. To change from inches to centimeters, the inches must cancel.
Thus the factor 2.54 cm/1 in is used. To change from centimeters to inches, centimeters must cancel, and the factor 1 in/2.54 cm is appropriate.

PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Converting from One Unit to Another

» To convert from one unit to another, use the equivalence statement that relates
the two units.

» Derive the appropriate unit factor by looking at the direction of the required
change (to cancel the unwanted units).
» Multiply the quantity to be converted by the unit factor to give the quantity
with the desired units.

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 1.6

Unit Conversions II
You want to order a bicycle with a 25.5-in frame, but the sizes in the catalog are given
only in centimeters. What size should you order?

SOLUTION

Where are we going?
To convert from inches to centimeters
What do we know?
❯ The size needed is 25.5 in.

How do we get there?
Since we want to convert from inches to centimeters, we need the equivalence state2.54 cm
ment 2.54 cm 5 1 in. The correct unit factor in this case is
:
1 in
25.5 in 3

2.54 cm
5 64.8 cm
1 in
See Exercises 1.45 through 1.47

To ensure that the conversion procedure is clear, a multistep problem is considered
in Example 1.7.
INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 1.7

Unit Conversions III
A student has entered a 10.0-km run. How long is the run in miles?

SOLUTION

Where are we going?
To convert from kilometers to miles
What do we know?
❯ The run is 10.00 km long.

How do we get there?
This conversion can be accomplished in several different ways. Since we have the
equivalence statement 1 m 5 1.094 yd, we will proceed by a path that uses this fact.
Before we start any calculations, let us consider our strategy. We have kilometers,
which we want to change to miles. We can do this by the following route:
kilometers

meters

yards

miles

To proceed in this way, we need the following equivalence statements:
1k m 5 1000 m
1m 5 1.094 yd
1760y d 5 1 mi
To make sure the process is clear, we will proceed step by step:

Kilometers to Meters
10.0 km 3

1000 m
5 1.00 3 104 m
1 km

Meters to Yards
1.00 3 104 m 3

1.094 yd
5 1.094 3 104 yd
1m

Note that we should have only three significant figures in the result. However, since
this is an intermediate result, we will carry the extra digit. Remember, round off only
the final result.
In the text we round to the correct number
of significant figures after each step to
show the correct significant figures for
each calculation. However, since you use
a calculator and combine steps on it, you
should round only at the end.

Yards to Miles
1.094 3 104 yd 3

1 mi
5 6.216 mi
1760 yd

Note in this case that 1 mi equals exactly 1760 yd by designation. Thus 1760 is an
exact number.
Since the distance was originally given as 10.0 km, the result can have only three
significant figures and should be rounded to 6.22 mi. Thus
10.0 km 5 6.22 mi
Alternatively, we can combine the steps:
10.0 km 3

1000 m
1.094 yd
1 mi
5 6.22 mi
1 km
1m
1760 yd
See Exercises 1.49 and 1.50

1.7 Dimensional Analysis

In using dimensional analysis, your verification that everything has been done correctly is that you end up with the correct units. In doing chemistry problems, you
should always include the units for the quantities used. Always check to see that the
units cancel to give the correct units for the final result. This provides a very valuable
check, especially for complicated problems.
Study the procedures for unit conversions in the following examples.
INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 1.8

Unit Conversions IV
The speed limit on many highways in the United States is 55 mi/h. What number
would be posted in kilometers per hour?

SOLUTION

Where are we going?
To convert the speed limit from 55 miles per hour to kilometers per hour
What do we know?
❯ The speed limit is 55 mi/h.

How do we get there?
We use the following unit factors to make the required conversion:

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

Result obtained by
rounding only at the
end of the calculation

n

55 mi
1760 yd
1m
1 km
5 88 km /h
h
1 mi
1.094 yd
1000 m
Note that all units cancel except the desired kilometers per hour.
See Exercises 1.53 and 1.54

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 1.9

Unit Conversions V
A Japanese car is advertised as having a gas mileage of 15 km/L. Convert this rating to
miles per gallon.

SOLUTION

Where are we going?
To convert gas mileage from 15 kilometers per liter to miles per gallon
What do we know?
❯ The gas mileage is 15 km/L.

How do we get there?
We use the following unit factors to make the required conversion:

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

Result obtained by
rounding only at the
end of the calculation

n

15 km
1000 m
1.094 yd
1 mi
1L
4 qt
5 35 mi/gal
L
1 km
1m
1760 yd
1.06 qt
1 gal
See Exercise 1.56

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 1.10

Unit Conversions VI
The latest model Corvette has an engine with a displacement of 6.20 L. What is the
displacement in units of cubic inches?

SOLUTION

Where are we going?
To convert the engine displacement from liters to cubic inches
What do we know?
❯ The displacement is 6.20 L.

How do we get there?
We use the following unit factors to make the required conversion:
6.20 L 3

112 in2 3
1 ft3
5 378 in3
11 ft2 3
28.32 L

Note that the unit factor for conversion of feet to inches must be cubed to accommodate the conversion of ft3 to in3.
See Exercise 1.60

1.8 Temperature
Three systems for measuring temperature are widely used: the Celsius scale, the
Kelvin scale, and the Fahrenheit scale. The first two temperature systems are used in
the physical sciences, and the third is used in many of the engineering sciences. Our
purpose here is to define the three temperature scales and show how conversions from
one scale to another can be performed. Although these conversions can be carried out
routinely on most calculators, we will consider the process in some detail here to illustrate methods of problem solving.
The three temperature scales are defined and compared in Fig. 1.9. Note that the
size of the temperature unit (the degree) is the same for the Kelvin and Celsius scales.
The fundamental difference between these two temperature scales is their zero points.
Conversion between these two scales simply requires an adjustment for the different
zero points.
Temperature 1Kelvin2 5 temperature 1Celsius2 1 273.15

TK 5 TC 1 273.15

or
TC 5 TK 2 273.15

Temperature 1Celsius2 5 temperature 1Kelvin2 2 273.15

For example, to convert 300.00 K to the Celsius scale, we do the following
calculation:
300.00 2 273.15 5 26.85°C
Note that in expressing temperature in Celsius units, the designation 8C is used. The
degree symbol is not used when writing temperature in terms of the Kelvin scale. The
unit of temperature on this scale is called a kelvin and is symbolized by the letter K.
Converting between the Fahrenheit and Celsius scales is somewhat more complicated because both the degree sizes and the zero points are different. Thus we need to
consider two adjustments: one for degree size and one for the zero point. First, we

1.8 Temperature
FIGURE 1.9 The three major
temperature scales.

Boiling
point
of water

212°F

373.15 K

100°C
Celsius
degrees

Fahrenheit
degrees
Freezing
point
of water

Kelvin

Celsius

Fahrenheit

kelvins

32°F

0°C

273.15 K

−40°F

−40°C

233.15 K

must account for the difference in degree size. This can be done by reconsidering
Fig. 1.9. Notice that since 2128F 5 1008C and 328F 5 08C,
212 2 32 5 180 Fahrenheit degrees 5 100 2 0 5 100 Celsius degrees
Thus 1808 on the Fahrenheit scale is equivalent to 1008 on the Celsius scale, and the
unit factor is
180°F
100°C

or

9°F
5°C

or the reciprocal, depending on the direction in which we need to go.
Next, we must consider the different zero points. Since 328F 5 08C, we obtain the
corresponding Celsius temperature by first subtracting 32 from the Fahrenheit temperature to account for the different zero points. Then the unit factor is applied to
adjust for the difference in the degree size. This process is summarized by the
equation
1TF 2 32°F2

5°C
5 TC
9°F

(1.1)

where TF and TC represent a given temperature on the Fahrenheit and Celsius scales,
respectively. In the opposite conversion, we first correct for degree size and then correct for the different zero point. This process can be summarized in the following
general equation:
TF 5 T C 3
Understand the process of converting from
one temperature scale to another; do not
simply memorize the equations.

9°F
1 32°F
5°C

(1.2)

Equations (1.1) and (1.2) are really the same equation in different forms. See if you
can obtain Equation (1.2) by starting with Equation (1.1) and rearranging.
At this point it is worthwhile to weigh the two alternatives for learning to do temperature conversions: You can simply memorize the equations, or you can take the
time to learn the differences between the temperature scales and to understand the
processes involved in converting from one scale to another. The latter approach may

take a little more effort, but the understanding you gain will stick with you much longer than the memorized formulas. This choice also will apply to many of the other
chemical concepts. Try to think things through!

Temperature Conversions I

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 1.11

Normal body temperature is 98.68F. Convert this temperature to the Celsius and Kelvin
scales.

SOLUTION

Where are we going?
To convert the body temperature from degrees Fahrenheit to degrees Celsius and to
kelvins.
What do we know?
❯ The body temperature is 98.6°F.

Master File

How do we get there?
Rather than simply using the formulas to solve this problem, we will proceed by thinking it through. The situation is diagramed in Fig. 1.10. First, we want to convert 98.68F
to the Celsius scale. The number of Fahrenheit degrees between 32.08F and 98.68F is
66.68F. We must convert this difference to Celsius degrees:

▲

66.6°F 3

A nurse taking the temperature of a
patient.

5°C
5 37.0°C
9°F

Thus 98.68F corresponds to 37.08C.
Now we can convert to the Kelvin scale:
TK 5 TC 1 273.15 5 37.0 1 273.15 5 310.2 K
Note that the final answer has only one decimal place (37.0 is limiting).
See Exercises 1.61, 1.63, and 1.64

Fahrenheit

98.6°F

66.6°F

32°F

Celsius

Kelvin

?°C

66.6°F ×

0°C

?K

5°C
= 37.0°C
9°F

37.0 + 273.15 K = 310.2 K

273.15 K

FIGURE 1.10 Normal body
temperature on the Fahrenheit, Celsius,
and Kelvin scales.

1.8 Temperature
EXAMPLE 1.12

Temperature Conversions II
One interesting feature of the Celsius and Fahrenheit scales is that 2408C and 2408F
represent the same temperature, as shown in Fig. 1.9. Verify that this is true.

SOLUTION

Where are we going?
To show that 2408C 5 2408F
What do we know?
❯ The relationship between the Celsius and Fahrenheit scales

How do we get there?
The difference between 328F and 2408F is 728F. The difference between 08C and
2408C is 408C. The ratio of these is
72°F
8 3 9°F
9°F
40°C
8 3 5°C
5°C
as required. Thus 2408C is equivalent to 2408F.
See Exercise 1.65

Since, as shown in Example 1.12, 2408 on both the Fahrenheit and Celsius scales
represents the same temperature, this point can be used as a reference point (like 08C
and 328F) for a relationship between the two scales:
Number of Fahrenheit degrees
T 2 12402
9°F
5 F
Number of Celsius degrees
TC 2 12402
5°C
TF 1 40
9°F
TC 1 40
5°C

(1.3)

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 1.13

Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs © Cengage Learning

where TF and TC represent the same temperature (but not the same number). This equation can be used to convert Fahrenheit temperatures to Celsius, and vice versa, and
may be easier to remember than Equations (1.1) and (1.2).

Temperature Conversions III
Liquid nitrogen, which is often used as a coolant for low-temperature experiments, has a
boiling point of 77 K. What is this temperature
on the Fahrenheit scale?

SOLUTION

Where are we going?
To convert 77 K to the Fahrenheit scale
What do we know?
❯ The relationship between the Kelvin
and Fahrenheit scales

How do we get there?

▲
Liquid nitrogen is so cold that water
condenses out of the surrounding air,
forming a cloud as the nitrogen is poured.

We will first convert 77 K to the Celsius scale:
TC 5 TK 2 273.15 5 77 2 273.15 5 2196°C

To convert to the Fahrenheit scale, we will use Equation (1.3):
TF 1 40
9°F
TC 1 40
5°C
TF 1 40
T 1 40
9°F
5 F
2196°C 1 40
2156°C
5°C
TF 1 40 5

9°F
12156°C2 5 2281°F
5°C

TF 5 2281°F 2 40 5 2321°F
See Exercises 1.61, 1.63, and 1.64

1.9 Density
A property of matter that is often used by chemists as an “identification tag” for a
substance is density, the mass of substance per unit volume of the substance:
Density 5

mass
volume

The density of a liquid can be determined easily by weighing an accurately known
volume of liquid. This procedure is illustrated in Example 1.14.

INTERACTIVE EXAMPLE 1.14

Determining Density
A chemist, trying to identify an unknown liquid, finds that 25.00 cm3 of the substance
has a mass of 19.625 g at 208C. The following are the names and densities of the compounds that might be the liquid:
Compound

Density in g/cm3 at 208C

Chloroform

1.492

Diethyl ether

0.714

Ethanol

0.789

Isopropyl alcohol

0.785

Toluene

0.867

Which of these compounds is the most likely to be the unknown liquid?

SOLUTION

Where are we going?
To calculate the density of the unknown liquid
What do we know?
❯ The mass of a given volume of the liquid.

How do we get there?
There are two ways of indicating units that
occur in the denominator. For example, we
can write g/cm3 or g cm23. Although we
will use the former system here, the other
system is widely used.

To identify the unknown substance, we must determine its density. This can be done
by using the definition of density:
Density 5

mass
19.625 g
5 0.7850 g /cm3
volume
25.00 cm3

1.10 Classification of Matter

This density corresponds exactly to that of isopropyl alcohol, which therefore most
likely is the unknown liquid. However, note that the density of ethanol is also very
close. To be sure that the compound is isopropyl alcohol, we should run several more
density experiments. (In the modern laboratory, many other types of tests could be
done to distinguish between these two liquids.)
See Exercises 1.70 through 1.72

Besides being a tool for the identification of substances, density has many other
uses. For example, the liquid in your car’s lead storage battery (a solution of sulfuric
acid) changes density because the sulfuric acid is consumed as the battery discharges.
In a fully charged battery, the density of the solution is about 1.30 g/cm3. If the density
falls below 1.20 g/cm3, the battery will have to be recharged. Density measurement is
also used to determine the amount of antifreeze, and thus the level of protection against
freezing, in the cooling system of a car.
The densities of various common substances are given in Table 1.5.

TABLE 1.5 | Densities of Various Common Substances* at 208C
Physical State

Density (g/cm3)

Oxygen

Gas

0.00133

Hydrogen

Gas

0.000084

Ethanol

Liquid

0.789

Benzene

Liquid

0.880

Water

Liquid

0.9982

Substance

Magnesium

Solid

1.74

Salt (sodium chloride)

Solid

2.16

Aluminum

Solid

2.70

Iron

Solid

7.87

Copper

Solid

8.96

Silver

Solid

10.49

Lead

Solid

11.34

Mercury

Liquid

13.56

Gold

Solid

19.32

*At 1 atmosphere pressure.

1.10 Classification of Matter
Before we can hope to understand the changes we see going on around us—the growth
of plants, the rusting of steel, the aging of people, the acidification of rain—we must
find out how matter is organized. Matter, best defined as anything occupying space
and having mass, is the material of the universe. Matter is complex and has many levels of organization. In this section we will introduce basic ideas about the structure of
matter and its behavior.
We will start by considering the definitions of the fundamental properties of matter.
Matter exists in three states: solid, liquid, and gas. A solid is rigid; it has a fixed volume and shape. A liquid has a definite volume but no specific shape; it assumes the
shape of its container. A gas has no fixed volume or shape; it takes on the shape and
volume of its container. In contrast to liquids and solids, which are only slightly compressible, gases are highly compressible; it is relatively easy to decrease the volume of

FIGURE 1.11 The three states of
water (where red spheres represent
oxygen atoms and blue spheres
represent hydrogen atoms).

Ice

Water

Steam

Solid: The water molecules are
locked into rigid positions
and are close together.

Liquid: The water molecules
are still close together but can
move around to some extent.

Gas: The water molecules are
far apart and move randomly.

a gas. Molecular-level pictures of the three states of water are given in Fig. 1.11. The
different properties of ice, liquid water, and steam are determined by the different
arrangements of the molecules in these substances. Table 1.5 gives the states of some
common substances at 208C and 1 atmosphere pressure.
Most of the matter around us consists of mixtures of pure substances. Wood, gasoline, wine, soil, and air all are mixtures. The main characteristic of a mixture is that it
has variable composition. For example, wood is a mixture of many substances, the
proportions of which vary depending on the type of wood and where it grows. Mixtures can be classified as homogeneous (having visibly indistinguishable parts) or
heterogeneous (having visibly distinguishable parts).
A homogeneous mixture is called a solution. Air is a solution consisting of a mixture
of gases. Wine is a complex liquid solution. Brass is a solid solution of copper and zinc.
Sand in water and iced tea with ice cubes are examples of heterogeneous mixtures.
Heterogeneous mixtures usually can be separated into two or more homogeneous mixtures or pure substances (for example, the ice cubes can be separated from the tea).
Mixtures can be separated into pure substances by physical methods. A pure
substance is one with constant composition. Water is a good illustration of these
ideas. As we will discuss in detail later, pure water is composed solely of H2O molecules, but the water found in nature (groundwater or the water in a lake or ocean)
is really a mixture. Seawater, for example, contains large amounts of dissolved
minerals. Boiling seawater produces steam, which can be condensed to pure water,
leaving the minerals behind as solids. The dissolved minerals in seawater also can
be separated out by freezing the mixture, since pure water freezes out. The processes of boiling and freezing are physical changes. When water freezes or boils,
it changes its state but remains water; it is still composed of H2O molecules. A
physical change is a change in the form of a substance, not in its chemical composition. A physical change can be used to separate a mixture into pure compounds, but
it will not break compounds into elements.
One of the most important methods for separating the components of a mixture
is distillation, a process that depends on differences in the volatility (how readily
substances become gases) of the components. In simple distillation, a mixture is

1.10 Classification of Matter
FIGURE 1.12 Simple laboratory
distillation apparatus. Cool water
circulates through the outer portion of
the condenser, causing vapors from the
distilling flask to condense into a liquid.
The nonvolatile component of the
mixture remains in the distilling flask.

Thermometer

Distilling
flask

Vapors

Condenser

Water out

Cool
water in
Burner

The term volatile refers to the ease with
which a substance can be changed to its
vapor.

Receiving
flask

Distillate

heated in a device such as that shown in Fig. 1.12. The most volatile component
vaporizes at the lowest temperature, and the vapor passes through a cooled tube (a
condenser), where it condenses back into its liquid state.
The simple, one-stage distillation apparatus shown in Fig. 1.12 works very well
when only one component of the mixture is volatile. For example, a mixture of water
and sand is easily separated by boiling off the water. Water containing dissolved minerals behaves in much the same way. As the water is boiled off, the minerals remain
behind as nonvolatile solids. Simple distillation of seawater using the sun as the heat
source is an excellent way to desalinate (remove the minerals from) seawater.
However, when a mixture contains several volatile components, the one-step distillation does not give a pure substance in the receiving flask, and more elaborate methods are required.
Another method of separation is simple filtration, which is used when a mixture
consists of a solid and a liquid. The mixture is poured onto a mesh, such as filter paper,
which passes the liquid and leaves the solid behind.
A third method of separation is chromatography. Chromatography is the general
name applied to a series of methods that use a system with two phases (states) of matter: a mobile phase and a stationary phase. The stationary phase is a solid, and the
mobile phase is either a liquid or a gas. The separation process occurs because the
components of the mixture have different affinities for the two phases and thus move
through the system at different rates. A component with a high affinity for the mobile
phase moves relatively quickly through the chromatographic system, whereas one
with a high affinity for the solid phase moves more slowly.
One simple type of chromatography, paper chromatography, uses a strip of
porous paper, such as filter paper, for the stationary phase. A drop of the mixture to
be separated is placed on the paper, which is then dipped into a liquid (the mobile phase)
that travels up the paper as though it were a wick (Fig. 1.13). This method of separating
a mixture is often used by biochemists, who study the chemistry of living systems.
It should be noted that when a mixture is separated, the absolute purity of the separated
components is an ideal. Because water, for example, inevitably comes into contact with
other materials when it is synthesized or separated from a mixture, it is never absolutely
pure. With great care, however, substances can be obtained in very nearly pure form.

Photos © Charles D. Winters

FIGURE 1.13 Paper chromatography of ink. (a) A dot of the mixture to be
separated is placed at one end of a sheet
of porous paper. (b) The paper acts as a
wick to draw up the liquid.

Kristen Brochmann/Fundamental Photographs

a

The element mercury (top left) combines
with the element iodine (top right) to
form the compound mercuric iodide
(bottom). This is an example of a chemical change.

b

Pure substances are either compounds (combinations of elements) or free elements.
A compound is a substance with constant composition that can be broken down into
elements by chemical processes. An example of a chemical process is the electrolysis
of water, in which an electric current is passed through water to break it down into the
free elements hydrogen and oxygen. This process produces a chemical change because
the water molecules have been broken down. The water is gone, and in its place we
have the free elements hydrogen and oxygen. A chemical change is one in which a
given substance becomes a new substance or substances with different properties and
different composition. Elements are substances that cannot be decomposed into simpler substances by chemical or physical means.
We have seen that the matter around us has various levels of organization. The most
fundamental substances we have discussed so far are elements. As we will see in later
chapters, elements also have structure: They are composed of atoms, which in turn are
composed of nuclei and electrons. Even the nucleus has structure: It is composed of
protons and neutrons. And even these can be broken down further, into elementary
particles called quarks. However, we need not concern ourselves with such details at
this point. Fig. 1.14 summarizes our discussion of the organization of matter.

Matter
Variable composition?
Yes

No

Mixtures

Pure substances

Visibly
distinguishable parts?
Yes
Heterogeneous

FIGURE 1.14 The organization of
matter.

Contains various
types of atoms?
No
Homogeneous

No
Elements

Yes
Chemical
methods

Compounds

Atoms

For Review

For Review
Key terms

Scientific method

Section 1.2

❯

scientific method
measurement
hypothesis
theory
model
natural law
law of conservation of mass

❯

Section 1.3

Quantitative observations are called measurements.

SI system
mass
weight

❯

Models (theories) are explanations of why nature behaves in a
particular way.
❯

Measurements consist of a number and a unit.

❯

Measurements involve some uncertainty.
Uncertainty is indicated by the use of significant figures.
❯ Rules to determine significant figures
❯ Calculations using significant figures
Preferred system is the SI system.

❯

uncertainty
significant figures
accuracy
precision
random error
systematic error

❯

exponential notation

Temperature conversions
❯

TK 5 TC 1 273.15

❯

TC 5 1TF 2 32°F2 a

❯

TF 5 T C a

Section 1.7

unit factor method
dimensional analysis
Section 1.9

They are subject to modification over time and sometimes fail.

❯

Section 1.4

Section 1.5

Make observations
Formulate hypotheses
Perform experiments

5°C
b
9°F

9°F
b 1 32°F
5°C

Density

density
Section 1.10

matter
states (of matter)
homogeneous mixture
heterogeneous mixture
solution
pure substance
physical change
distillation
filtration
chromatography
paper chromatography
compound
chemical change
element

❯

Density 5

mass
volume

Matter can exist in three states:
❯
❯
❯

Solid
Liquid
Gas

Mixtures can be separated by methods involving only physical
changes:
❯
❯
❯

Distillation
Filtration
Chromatography

Compounds can be decomposed to elements only through
chemical changes.

Review Questions Answers to the Review Questions can be found on the Student website (accessible from www.cengagebrain.com).
1. Define and explain the differences between the following terms.
a. law and theory
b. theory and experiment
c. qualitative and quantitative
d. hypothesis and theory
2. Is the scientific method suitable for solving problems
only in the sciences? Explain.
3. Which of the following statements could be tested by
quantitative measurement?
a. Ty Cobb was a better hitter than Pete Rose.
b. Ivory soap is 99.44% pure.
c. Rolaids consumes 47 times its weight in excess
stomach acid.
4. For each of the following pieces of glassware, provide a
sample measurement and discuss the number of significant figures and uncertainty.

5. A student performed an analysis of a sample for its
calcium content and got the following results:
14.92%

14.91%

14.88%

14.91%

The actual amount of calcium in the sample is 15.70%.
What conclusions can you draw about the accuracy and
precision of these results?
6. Compare and contrast the multiplication/division significant figure rule to the significant figure rule applied
for addition/subtraction in mathematical operations.
7. Explain how density can be used as a conversion factor
to convert the volume of an object to the mass of the
object, and vice versa.
8. On which temperature scale (8F, 8C, or K) does 1 degree
represent the smallest change in temperature?
9. Distinguish between physical changes and chemical
changes.
10. Why is the separation of mixtures into pure or relatively
pure substances so important when performing a chemical analysis?

a

b

c

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in
class.
1. a. There are 365 days per year, 24 hours per day, 12 months
per year, and 60 minutes per hour. Use these data to determine how many minutes are in a month.
b. Now use the following data to calculate the number of
minutes in a month: 24 hours per day, 60 minutes per
hour, 7 days per week, and 4 weeks per month.
c. Why are these answers different? Which (if any) is more
correct? Why?
2. You go to a convenience store to buy candy and find the owner
to be rather odd. He allows you to buy pieces in multiples of
four, and to buy four, you need $0.23. He only allows you to
do this by using 3 pennies and 2 dimes. You have a bunch of
pennies and dimes, and instead of counting them, you decide
to weigh them. You have 636.3 g of pennies, and each penny

weighs 3.03 g. Each dime weighs 2.29 g. Each piece of candy
weighs 10.23 g.
a. How many pennies do you have?
b. How many dimes do you need to buy as much candy as
possible?
c. How much should all these dimes weigh?
d. How many pieces of candy could you buy? (number of
dimes from part b)
e. How much would this candy weigh?
f. How many pieces of candy could you buy with twice as
many dimes?
3. When a marble is dropped into a beaker of water, it sinks to
the bottom. Which of the following is the best explanation?
a. The surface area of the marble is not large enough to be
held up by the surface tension of the water.
b. The mass of the marble is greater than that of the water.

For Review

c. The marble weighs more than an equivalent volume of the
water.
d. The force from dropping the marble breaks the surface
tension of the water.
e. The marble has greater mass and volume than the water.
Justify your choice, and for choices you did not pick, explain
what is wrong about them.
4. You have two beakers, one filled to the 100-mL mark with
sugar (the sugar has a mass of 180.0 g) and the other filled to
the 100-mL mark with water (the water has a mass of 100.0 g).
You pour all the sugar and all the water together in a bigger
beaker and stir until the sugar is completely dissolved.
a. Which of the following is true about the mass of the
solution? Explain.
i. It is much greater than 280.0 g.
ii. It is somewhat greater than 280.0 g.
iii. It is exactly 280.0 g.
iv. It is somewhat less than 280.0 g.
v. It is much less than 280.0 g.
b. Which of the following is true about the volume of the
solution? Explain.
i. It is much greater than 200.0 mL.
ii. It is somewhat greater than 200.0 mL.
iii. It is exactly 200.0 mL.
iv. It is somewhat less than 200.0 mL.
v. It is much less than 200.0 mL.
5. You may have noticed that when water boils, you can see bubbles that rise to the surface of the water.
a. What is inside these bubbles?
i. air
ii. hydrogen and oxygen gas
iii. oxygen gas
iv. water vapor
v. carbon dioxide gas
b. Is the boiling of water a chemical or physical change?
Explain.
6. If you place a glass rod over a burning candle, the glass
appears to turn black. What is happening to each of the following (physical change, chemical change, both, or neither) as the
candle burns? Explain each answer.
a. the wax
b. the wick
c. the glass rod
7. Which characteristics of a solid, a liquid, and a gas are exhibited by each of the following substances? How would you
classify each substance?
a. a bowl of pudding
b. a bucketful of sand
8. Sketch a magnified view (showing atoms/molecules) of each
of the following and explain:
a. a heterogeneous mixture of two different compounds
b. a homogeneous mixture of an element and a compound
9. Paracelsus, a sixteenth-century alchemist and healer, adopted
as his slogan: “The patients are your textbook, the sickbed is
your study.” Is this view consistent with using the scientific
method?
10. What is wrong with the following statement?
“The results of the experiment do not agree with the theory.
Something must be wrong with the experiment.”

11. Why is it incorrect to say that the results of a measurement
were accurate but not precise?
12. What data would you need to estimate the money you would
spend on gasoline to drive your car from New York to Chicago? Provide estimates of values and a sample calculation.
13. Sketch two pieces of glassware: one that can measure volume
to the thousandths place and one that can measure volume
only to the ones place.
14. You have a 1.0-cm3 sample of lead and a 1.0-cm3 sample of
glass. You drop each in separate beakers of water. How do the
volumes of water displaced by each sample compare? Explain.
15. Consider the addition of 15.4 to 28. What would a mathematician say the answer is? What would a scientist say? Justify the
scientist’s answer, not merely citing the rule, but explaining it.
16. Consider multiplying 26.2 by 16.43. What would a mathematician say the answer is? What would a scientist say? Justify
the scientist’s answer, not merely citing the rule, but explaining it.
17. True or false? For mathematical operation performed on two
measurements, the number of significant figures in the answer
is the same as the least number of significant figures in either
of the measurements. Explain your answer.
18. Is there a difference between a homogeneous mixture of
hydrogen and oxygen in a 2;1 ratio and a sample of water
vapor? Explain.
A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to
that question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a
solution appears in the Solutions Guide, as found on the Instructor
Companion Site.

Questions
19. The difference between a law and a theory is the difference
between what and why. Explain.
20. The scientific method is a dynamic process. What does this
mean?
21. Explain the fundamental steps of the scientific method.
22. What is the difference between random error and systematic
error?
23. A measurement is a quantitative observation involving both a
number and a unit. What is a qualitative observation? What are
the SI units for mass, length, and volume? What is the assumed
uncertainty in a number (unless stated otherwise)? The uncertainty of a measurement depends on the precision of the measuring device. Explain.
24. To determine the volume of a cube, a student measured one of
the dimensions of the cube several times. If the true dimension
of the cube is 10.62 cm, give an example of four sets of measurements that would illustrate the following.
a. imprecise and inaccurate data
b. precise but inaccurate data
c. precise and accurate data
Give a possible explanation as to why data can be imprecise or inaccurate. What is wrong with saying a set of measurements is imprecise but accurate?

25. What are significant figures? Show how to indicate the number one thousand to 1 significant figure, 2 significant figures,
3 significant figures, and 4 significant figures. Why is the
answer, to the correct number of significant figures, not 1.0 for
the following calculation?
1.5 2 1.0
0.50
26. A cold front moves through and the temperature drops by
20 degrees. In which temperature scale would this 20 degree
change represent the largest change in temperature?
27. When the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit (TF) is plotted vs.
the temperature in degrees Celsius (TC), a straight-line plot
results. A straight-line plot also results when TC is plotted vs.
TK (the temperature in kelvins). Reference Appendix A1.3 and
determine the slope and y-intercept of each of these two plots.
28. In a multiple-step calculation, is it better to round off the numbers to the correct number of significant figures in each step of
the calculation or to round off only the final answer?
29. Is the density of a gaseous substance larger or smaller than the
density of a liquid or a solid at the same temperature? Why?
30. Give four examples illustrating each of the following terms.
a. homogeneous mixture
d. element
b. heterogeneous mixture
e. physical change
c. compound
f. chemical change

34. How many significant figures are in each of the following?
a. 100
e. 0.0048
b. 1.0 3 10
f. 0.00480
c. 1.00 3 103
g. 4.80 3 1023
d. 100.
h. 4.800 3 1023
35. Round off each of the following numbers to the indicated
number of significant digits, and write the answer in standard
scientific notation.
a. 0.00034159 to three digits
b. 103.351 3 102 to four digits
c. 17.9915 to five digits
d. 3.365 3 105 to three digits
36. Use exponential notation to express the number 385,500 to
a. one significant figure.
b. two significant figures.
c. three significant figures.
d. five significant figures.
37. You have liquid in each graduated cylinder shown:

mL

Exercises

In this section similar exercises are paired.

mL

Significant Figures and Unit Conversions

0.5

31. Which of the following are exact numbers?
a. There are 100 cm in 1 m.
b. One meter equals 1.094 yards.
c. We can use the equation

°F 5 95°C 1 32
to convert from Celsius to Fahrenheit temperature. Are the
numbers 95 and 32 exact or inexact?
d. p 5 3.1415927.
32. Indicate the number of significant figures in each of the
following:
a. This book contains more than 1000 pages.
b. A mile is about 5300 ft.
c. A liter is equivalent to 1.059 qt.
d. The population of the United States is approaching
3.1 3 102 million.
e. A kilogram is 1000 g.
f. The Boeing 747 cruises at around 600 mi/h.
33. How many significant figures are there in each of the following values?
a. 6.07 3 10215
e. 463.8052
b. 0.003840
f. 300
c. 17.00
g. 301
d. 8 3 108
h. 300.

You then add both samples to a beaker. How would you write
the number describing the total volume? What limits the precision of this number?
38. The beakers shown below have different precisions.

32.9

32.8

32.7

a. Label the amount of water in each of the three beakers to
the correct number of significant figures.
b. Is it possible for each of the three beakers to contain the
exact same amount of water? If no, why not? If yes, did
you report the volumes as the same in part a? Explain.
c. Suppose you pour the water from these three beakers into
one container. What should be the volume in the container
reported to the correct number of significant figures?

For Review

39. Evaluate each of the following, and write the answer to the
appropriate number of significant figures.
a. 212.2 1 26.7 1 402.09
b. 1.0028 1 0.221 1 0.10337
c. 52.331 1 26.01 2 0.9981
d. 2.01 3 102 1 3.014 3 103
e. 7.255 2 6.8350
40. Perform the following mathematical operations, and express
each result to the correct number of significant figures.
0.102 3 0.0821 3 273
a.
1.01
b. 0.14 3 6.022 3 1023
c. 4.0 3 104 3 5.021 3 1023 3 7.34993 3 102
2.00 3 106
d.
3.00 3 1027
41. Perform the following mathematical operations, and express
the result to the correct number of significant figures.
0.470
80.705
2.526
a.
3.1
0.623
0.4326
b. (6.404 3 2.91)y(18.7 2 17.1)
c. 6.071 3 1025 2 8.2 3 1026 2 0.521 3 1024
d. (3.8 3 10212 1 4.0 3 10213)y(4 3 1012 1 6.3 3 1013)
9.5 1 4.1 1 2.8 1 3.175
e.
(Assume that this operation is taking the average of four
numbers. Thus 4 in the denominator is exact.)
8.925 2 8.905
f.
3 100
8.925
(This type of calculation is done many times in calculating a
percentage error. Assume that this example is such a calculation; thus 100 can be considered to be an exact number.)
42. Perform the following mathematical operations, and express
the result to the correct number of significant figures.
a. 6.022 3 1023 3 1.05 3 102
6.6262 3 10234 3 2.998 3 108
b.
2.54 3 1029
c. 1.285 3 1022 1 1.24 3 1023 1 1.879 3 1021
11.00866 2 1.007282
d.
6.02205 3 1023
9.875 3 102 2 9.795 3 102
e.
3 100 1100 is exact2
9.875 3 102
9.42 3 102 1 8.234 3 102 1 1.625 3 103
13 is exact2
f.
43. Perform each of the following conversions.
a. 8.43 cm to millimeters
b. 2.41 3 102 cm to meters
c. 294.5 nm to centimeters
d. 1.445 3 104 m to kilometers
e. 235.3 m to millimeters
f. 903.3 nm to micrometers

34a

44. a. How many kilograms are in 1 teragram?
b. How many nanometers are in 6.50 3 102 terameters?
c. How many kilograms are in 25 femtograms?
d. How many liters are in 8.0 cubic decimeters?
e. How many microliters are in 1 milliliter?
f. How many picograms are in 1 microgram?
45. Perform the following unit conversions.
a. Congratulations! You and your spouse are the proud
parents of a new baby, born while you are studying in a
country that uses the metric system. The nurse has
informed you that the baby weighs 3.91 kg and measures
51.4 cm. Convert your baby’s weight to pounds and
ounces and her length to inches (rounded to the nearest
quarter inch).
b. The circumference of the earth is 25,000 mi at the equator. What is the circumference in kilometers? in meters?
c. A rectangular solid measures 1.0 m by 5.6 cm by 2.1 dm.
Express its volume in cubic meters, liters, cubic inches,
and cubic feet.
46. Perform the following unit conversions.
a. 908 oz to kilograms
b. 12.8 L to gallons
c. 125 mL to quarts
d. 2.89 gal to milliliters
e. 4.48 lb to grams
f. 550 mL to quarts
47. Use the following exact conversion factors to perform the
stated calculations:
512 yd 5 1 rod
40 rods 5 1 furlong
8 furlongs 5 1 mile
a. The Kentucky Derby race is 1.25 miles. How long is the
race in rods, furlongs, meters, and kilometers?
b. A marathon race is 26 miles, 385 yards. What is this
distance in rods, furlongs, meters, and kilometers?
48. Although the preferred SI unit of area is the square meter, land
is often measured in the metric system in hectares (ha). One
hectare is equal to 10,000 m2. In the English system, land is
often measured in acres (1 acre 5 160 rod2). Use the exact
conversions and those given in Exercise 47 to calculate the
following.
a. 1 ha 5 ________ km2
b. The area of a 5.5-acre plot of land in hectares, square
meters, and square kilometers
c. A lot with dimensions 120 ft by 75 ft is to be sold for
$6500. What is the price per acre? What is the price per
hectare?

34b

49. Precious metals and gems are measured in troy weights in the
English system:
24 grains 5 1 pennyweight 1exact2
20 pennyweight 5 1 troy ounce 1exact2
12 troy ounces 5 1 troy pound 1exact2
1 grain 5 0.0648 g
1 carat 5 0.200 g

a. The most common English unit of mass is the pound
avoirdupois. What is 1 troy pound in kilograms and in
pounds?
b. What is the mass of a troy ounce of gold in grams and in
carats?
c. The density of gold is 19.3 g/cm3. What is the volume of a
troy pound of gold?
50. Apothecaries (druggists) use the following set of measures in
the English system:
20 grains ap 5 1 scruple 1exact2
3 scruples 5 1 dram ap 1exact2
8 dram ap 5 1 oz ap 1exact2
1 dram ap 5 3.888 g
a. Is an apothecary grain the same as a troy grain? (See
Exercise 49.)
b. 1 oz ap 5 ________ oz troy.
c. An aspirin tablet contains 5.00 3 102 mg of active ingredient. What mass in grains ap of active ingredient does it
contain? What mass in scruples?
d. What is the mass of 1 scruple in grams?
51. For a pharmacist dispensing pills or capsules, it is often easier
to weigh the medication to be dispensed than to count the individual pills. If a single antibiotic capsule weighs 0.65 g, and a
pharmacist weighs out 15.6 g of capsules, how many capsules
have been dispensed?
52. A children’s pain relief elixir contains 80. mg acetaminophen
per 0.50 teaspoon. The dosage recommended for a child who
weighs between 24 and 35 lb is 1.5 teaspoons. What is the range
of acetaminophen dosages, expressed in mg acetaminophen/kg
body weight, for children who weigh between 24 and 35 lb?
53. Science fiction often uses nautical analogies to describe space
travel. If the starship U.S.S. Enterprise is traveling at warp
factor 1.71, what is its speed in knots and in miles per hour?
(Warp 1.71 5 5.00 times the speed of light; speed of light 5
3.00 3 108 m/s; 1 knot 5 2030 yd/h.)
54. The world record for the hundred meter dash is 9.58 s. What is
the corresponding average speed in units of m/s, km/h, ft/s,
and mi/h? At this speed, how long would it take to run 1.00 3
102 yards?
55. You are driving 65 mi/h and take your eyes off the road for
“just a second.” What distance (in feet) do you travel in this
time?
56. You pass a road sign saying “New York 112 km.” If you drive
at a constant speed of 65 mi/h, how long should it take you to
reach New York? If your car gets 28 miles to the gallon, how
many liters of gasoline are necessary to travel 112 km?

57. The dosage for an antibiotic is prescribed at 8.0 mg per kilogram of body weight, taken twice daily for two weeks. What
total mass of antibiotic will be taken by a 180-lb person for the
two-week period?
58. In recent years, there has been a large push for an increase in
the use of renewable resources to produce the energy we need
to power our vehicles. One of the newer fuels that has become
more widely available is E85, a mixture of 85% ethanol and
15% gasoline. Despite being more environmentally friendly,
one of the potential drawbacks of E85 fuel is that it produces
less energy than conventional gasoline. Assume a car gets
28.0 mi/gal using gasoline at $3.50/gal and 22.5 mi/gal using
E85 at $2.85/gal. How much will it cost to drive 500. miles
using each fuel?
59. Mercury poisoning is a debilitating disease that is often fatal.
In the human body, mercury reacts with essential enzymes
leading to irreversible inactivity of these enzymes. If the
amount of mercury in a polluted lake is 0.4 mg Hg/mL, what
is the total mass in kilograms of mercury in the lake? (The lake
has a surface area of 100 mi2 and an average depth of 20 ft.)
60. Carbon monoxide (CO) detectors sound an alarm when peak
levels of carbon monoxide reach 100 parts per million (ppm).
This level roughly corresponds to a composition of air that
contains 400,000 mg carbon monoxide per cubic meter of air
(400,000 mg/m3). Assuming the dimensions of a room are
18 ft 3 12 ft 3 8 ft, estimate the mass of carbon monoxide in
the room that would register 100 ppm on a carbon monoxide
detector.

Temperature
61. Convert the following Fahrenheit temperatures to the Celsius
and Kelvin scales.
a. 24598F, an extremely low temperature
b. 240.8F, the answer to a trivia question
c. 688F, room temperature
d. 7 3 107 8F, temperature required to initiate fusion reactions in the sun
62. A thermometer gives a reading of 96.18F 6 0.28F. What is the
temperature in 8C? What is the uncertainty?
63. Convert the following Celsius temperatures to Kelvin and to
Fahrenheit degrees.
a. the temperature of someone with a fever, 39.28C
b. a cold wintery day, 2258C
c. the lowest possible temperature, 22738C
d. the melting-point temperature of sodium chloride, 8018C
64. Convert the following Kelvin temperatures to Celsius and
Fahrenheit degrees.
a. the temperature that registers the same value on both the
Fahrenheit and Celsius scales, 233 K
b. the boiling point of helium, 4 K
c. the temperature at which many chemical quantities are
determined, 298 K
d. the melting point of tungsten, 3680 K

For Review

65. At what temperature is the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit
equal to twice the temperature in degrees Celsius?
66. The average daytime temperatures on the earth and Jupiter are
728F and 313 K, respectively. Calculate the difference in temperature, in 8C, between these two planets.
67. Use the figure below to answer the following questions.

130°C

50°X

−10°C

0°X

a. Derive the relationship between 8C and 8X.
b. If the temperature outside is 22.08C, what is the temperature in units of 8X?
c. Convert 58.08X to units of 8C, K, and 8F.
68. Ethylene glycol is the main component in automobile antifreeze. To monitor the temperature of an auto cooling system,
you intend to use a meter that reads from 0 to 100. You devise
a new temperature scale based on the approximate melting
and boiling points of a typical antifreeze solution (2458C and
1158C). You wish these points to correspond to 08A and
1008A, respectively.
a. Derive an expression for converting between 8A and 8C.
b. Derive an expression for converting between 8F and 8A.
c. At what temperature would your thermometer and a
Celsius thermometer give the same numerical reading?
d. Your thermometer reads 868A. What is the temperature in
8C and in 8F?
e. What is a temperature of 458C in 8A?

Density
69. A material will float on the surface of a liquid if the material
has a density less than that of the liquid. Given that the density
of water is approximately 1.0 g/mL, will a block of material
having a volume of 1.2 3 104 in3 and weighing 350 lb float or
sink when placed in a reservoir of water?
70. One metal object is a cube with edges of 3.00 cm and a mass of
140.4 g. A second metal object is a sphere with a radius of
1.42 cm and a mass of 61.6 g. Are these objects made of the
same or different metals? Assume the calculated densities are
accurate to 61.00%.

34c

71. A star is estimated to have a mass of 2 3 1036 kg. Assuming it
to be a sphere of average radius 7.0 3 105 km, calculate the
average density of the star in units of grams per cubic
centimeter.
72. A rectangular block has dimensions 2.9 cm 3 3.5 cm 3
10.0 cm. The mass of the block is 615.0 g. What are the volume and density of the block?
73. Diamonds are measured in carats, and 1 carat 5 0.200 g. The
density of diamond is 3.51 g/cm3.
a. What is the volume of a 5.0-carat diamond?
b. What is the mass in carats of a diamond measuring 2.8 mL?
74. At room temperature the element bromine, Br2, is a liquid with
a density of 3.12 g/cm3. Calculate the mass of 125 mL of bromine. What volume does 85.0 g of bromine occupy?
75. A sample containing 33.42 g of metal pellets is poured into a
graduated cylinder initially containing 12.7 mL of water, causing the water level in the cylinder to rise to 21.6 mL. Calculate
the density of the metal.
76. The density of pure silver is 10.5 g/cm3 at 208C. If 5.25 g of
pure silver pellets is added to a graduated cylinder containing
11.2 mL of water, to what volume level will the water in the
cylinder rise?
77. In each of the following pairs, which has the greater mass?
(See Table 1.5.)
a. 1.0 kg of feathers or 1.0 kg of lead
b. 1.0 mL of mercury or 1.0 mL of water
c. 19.3 mL of water or 1.00 mL of gold
d. 75 mL of copper or 1.0 L of benzene
78. a. Calculate the mass of ethanol in 1.50 qt of ethanol. (See
Table 1.5.)
b. Calculate the mass of mercury in 3.5 in3 of mercury. (See
Table 1.5.)
79. In each of the following pairs, which has the greater volume?
a. 1.0 kg of feathers or 1.0 kg of lead
b. 100 g of gold or 100 g of water
c. 1.0 L of copper or 1.0 L of mercury
80. Using Table 1.5, calculate the volume of 25.0 g of each of the
following substances at 1 atm.
a. hydrogen gas
b. water
c. iron
Chapter 5 discusses the properties of gases. One property
unique to gases is that they contain mostly empty space.
Explain using the results of your calculations.
81. The density of osmium (the densest metal) is 22.57 g/cm3. If a
1.00-kg rectangular block of osmium has two dimensions of
4.00 cm 3 4.00 cm, calculate the third dimension of the block.
82. A copper wire (density 5 8.96 g/cm3) has a diameter of
0.25 mm. If a sample of this copper wire has a mass of 22 g,
how long is the wire?

34d

Classification and Separation of Matter
83. Match each description below with the following microscopic
pictures. More than one picture may fit each description. A
picture may be used more than once or not used at all.

i

ii

iii

iv

v

vi

a. a gaseous compound
b. a mixture of two gaseous elements
c. a solid element
d. a mixture of a gaseous element and a gaseous compound
84. Define the following terms: solid, liquid, gas, pure substance,
element, compound, homogeneous mixture, heterogeneous
mixture, solution, chemical change, physical change.
85. What is the difference between homogeneous and heterogeneous matter? Classify each of the following as homogeneous
or heterogeneous.
a. a door
d. the water you drink
b. the air you breathe
e. salsa
c. a cup of coffee (black)
f. your lab partner
86. Classify the following mixtures as homogeneous or heterogeneous.
a. potting soil
d. window glass
b. white wine
e. granite
c. your sock drawer
87. Classify each of the following as a mixture or a pure
substance.
a. water
f. uranium
b. blood
g. wine
c. the oceans
h. leather
d. iron
i. table salt
e. brass
Of the pure substances, which are elements and which are
compounds?
88. Suppose a teaspoon of magnesium filings and a teaspoon of
powdered sulfur are placed together in a metal beaker. Would
this constitute a mixture or a pure substance? Suppose the
magnesium filings and sulfur are heated so that they react with
each other, forming magnesium sulfide. Would this still be a
“mixture”? Why or why not?
89. If a piece of hard, white blackboard chalk is heated strongly in
a flame, the mass of the piece of chalk will decrease, and eventually the chalk will crumble into a fine white dust. Does this
change suggest that the chalk is composed of an element or a
compound?

90. During a very cold winter, the temperature may remain below
freezing for extended periods. However, fallen snow can still
disappear, even though it cannot melt. This is possible because
a solid can vaporize directly, without passing through the liquid state. Is this process (sublimation) a physical or a chemical
change?
91. Classify the following as physical or chemical changes.
a. Moth balls gradually vaporize in a closet.
b. Hydrofluoric acid attacks glass and is used to etch calibration marks on glass laboratory utensils.
c. A French chef making a sauce with brandy is able to boil
off the alcohol from the brandy, leaving just the brandy
flavoring.
d. Chemistry majors sometimes get holes in the cotton jeans
they wear to lab because of acid spills.
92. The properties of a mixture are typically averages of the properties of its components. The properties of a compound may
differ dramatically from the properties of the elements that
combine to produce the compound. For each process described
below, state whether the material being discussed is most
likely a mixture or a compound, and state whether the process
is a chemical change or a physical change.
a. An orange liquid is distilled, resulting in the collection of
a yellow liquid and a red solid.
b. A colorless, crystalline solid is decomposed, yielding a
pale yellow-green gas and a soft, shiny metal.
c. A cup of tea becomes sweeter as sugar is added to it.

Additional Exercises
93. Two spherical objects have the same mass. One floats on
water; the other sinks. Which object has the greater diameter?
Explain.
94. A 194-g sample of caffeine (C8H10N4O2) contains 6.02 3 1023
molecules of caffeine. If a typical 10-hour energy drink contains 422 mg of caffeine, how many molecules of caffeine are
present in the drink?
95. Lipitor, a pharmaceutical drug that has been shown to lower
“bad” cholesterol levels while raising “good” cholesterol levels in patients taking the drug, had over $3 billion in sales in
2015. Assuming one 2.5-g pill contains 4.0% of the active
ingredient by mass, what mass in kg of active ingredient is
present in one bottle of 100 pills?
96. In Shakespeare’s Richard III, the First Murderer says:
“Take that, and that! [Stabs Clarence]
If that is not enough, I’ll drown you in a malmsey butt within!”
Given that 1 butt 5 126 gal, in how many liters of malmsey (a
foul brew similar to mead) was the unfortunate Clarence about
to be drowned?
97. The contents of one 40. lb bag of topsoil will cover 10. square
feet of ground to a depth of 1.0 inch. What number of bags is
needed to cover a plot that measures 200. by 300. m to a depth
of 4.0 cm?

For Review

98. In the opening scenes of the movie Raiders of the Lost Ark,
Indiana Jones tries to remove a gold idol from a booby-trapped
pedestal. He replaces the idol with a bag of sand of approximately equal volume. (Density of gold 5 19.32 g/cm3; density
of sand < 2 g/cm3.)
a. Did he have a reasonable chance of not activating the
mass-sensitive booby trap?
b. In a later scene, he and an unscrupulous guide play catch
with the idol. Assume that the volume of the idol is about
1.0 L. If it were solid gold, what mass would the idol
have? Is playing catch with it plausible?
99. A parsec is an astronomical unit of distance where 1 parsec 5
3.26 light years (1 light year equals the distance traveled by
light in one year). If the speed of light is 186,000 mi/s, calculate the distance in meters of an object that travels 9.6 parsecs.
100. The active ingredient of aspirin tablets is acetylsalicylic acid,
which has a density of 1.4 g/cm3. In a lab class, a student used
paper chromatography to isolate another common ingredient
of headache remedies. The isolated sample had a mass of
0.384 g and a volume of 0.32 cm3. Given the data in the following table, what was the other ingredient in the headache
remedy?

Density Values for Potential Headache Remedies
Compound

Density (g/cm3)

White table sugar

0.70

Caffeine

1.2

Acetylsalicylic acid

1.4

Sodium chloride

2.2

101. This year, like many past years, you begin to feel very sleepy
after eating a large helping of Thanksgiving turkey. Some
people attribute this sleepiness to the presence of the amino
acid tryptophan in turkey. Tryptophan can be used by the body
to produce serotonin, which can calm the brain’s activity and
help to bring on sleep.
a. What mass in grams of tryptophan is in a 0.25-lb serving
of turkey? (Assume tryptophan accounts for 1.0% of the
turkey mass.)
b. What mass in grams of tryptophan is in 0.25 quart of
milk? (Assume tryptophan accounts for 2.0% of milk by
mass and that the density of milk is 1.04 kg/L.)
102. Which of the following are chemical changes? Which are
physical changes?
a. the cutting of food
b. interaction of food with saliva and digestive enzymes
c. proteins being broken down into amino acids
d. complex sugars being broken down into simple sugars
e. making maple syrup by heating maple sap to remove
water through evaporation
f. DNA unwinding

34e

103. A person with high cholesterol has 250 mg of cholesterol per
100.0 mL of blood. If the total blood volume of the person is
5.4 L, what is the total mass (in grams) of cholesterol present
in the person’s blood?
104. Assume the following numbers are known to 61 in the last
digit. Perform the following divisions and estimate the maximum uncertainty in each result, that is, determine the largest
and smallest number that could occur for each case (see
Appendix 1.5).
a. 103 4 101
b. 101 4 99
c. 99 4 101
Considering your calculated error limits, to how many significant figures should each result be expressed? Do any of these
constitute an exception to the rule for division listed in Section 1.5? Rationalize any discrepancies.
105. A column of liquid is found to expand linearly on heating.
Assume the column rises 5.25 cm for a 10.08F rise in temperature. If the initial temperature of the liquid is 98.68F, what will
the final temperature be in 8C if the liquid has expanded by
18.5 cm?
106. A 25.00-g sample of a solid is placed in a graduated cylinder,
and then the cylinder is filled to the 50.0-mL mark with benzene. The mass of benzene and solid together is 58.80 g.
Assuming that the solid is insoluble in benzene and that the
density of benzene is 0.880 g/cm3, calculate the density of the
solid.
107. For each of the following, decide which block is more dense:
the orange block, the blue block, or it cannot be determined.
Explain your answers.

a

b

c

d

108. According to the Official Rules of Baseball, a baseball must
have a circumference not more than 9.25 in or less than
9.00 in and a mass not more than 5.25 oz or less than 5.00 oz.
What range of densities can a baseball be expected to have?
Express this range as a single number with an accompanying
uncertainty limit.

34f

109. The density of an irregularly shaped object was determined as
follows. The mass of the object was found to be 28.90 g 6
0.03 g. A graduated cylinder was partially filled with water.
The reading of the level of the water was 6.4 cm3 6 0.1 cm3.
The object was dropped in the cylinder, and the level of the
water rose to 9.8 cm3 6 0.1 cm3. What is the density of the
object with appropriate error limits? (See Appendix 1.5.)
110. The chemist in Example 1.14 did some further experiments.
She found that the pipet used to measure the volume of the
liquid is accurate to 60.03 cm3. The mass measurement is
accurate to 60.002 g. Are these measurements sufficiently
precise for the chemist to distinguish between isopropyl alcohol and ethanol?

ChemWork Problems
These multiconcept problems (and additional ones) are found interactively online with the same type of assistance a student would get
from an instructor.
111. The longest river in the world is the Nile River with a length
of 4145 mi. How long is the Nile in cable lengths, meters, and
nautical miles?
Use these exact conversions to help solve the problem:
6 ft 5 1 fathom
100 fathoms 5 1 cable length
10 cable lengths 5 1 nautical mile
3 nautical miles 5 1 league
112. Secretariat is known as the horse with the fastest run in the
Kentucky Derby. If Secretariat’s record 1.25-mi run lasted
1 minute 59.2 seconds, what was his average speed in m/s?
113. The hottest temperature recorded in the United States is 1348F
in Greenland Ranch, CA. The melting point of phosphorus
is 448C. At this temperature, would phosphorus be a liquid or
a solid?
114. The radius of a neon atom is 69 pm, and its mass is 3.35 3
10223 g. What is the density of the atom in grams per cubic
centimeter (g/cm3)? Assume the nucleus is a sphere with volume 5 43 pr 3.
115. Which of the following statements is(are) true?
a. A spoonful of sugar is a mixture.
b. Only elements are pure substances.
c. Air is a mixture of gases.
d. Gasoline is a pure substance.
e. Compounds can be broken down only by chemical means.
116. Which of the following describes a chemical property?
a. The density of iron is 7.87 g/cm3.
b. A platinum wire glows red when heated.
c. An iron bar rusts.
d. Aluminum is a silver-colored metal.

Challenge Problems
117. A rule of thumb in designing experiments is to avoid using a
result that is the small difference between two large measured
quantities. In terms of uncertainties in measurement, why is
this good advice?
118. Draw a picture showing the markings (graduations) on glassware that would allow you to make each of the following volume measurements of water, and explain your answers (the
numbers given are as precise as possible).
a. 128.7 mL
b. 18 mL
c. 23.45 mL
If you made these measurements for three samples of water and
then poured all of the water together in one container, what total
volume of water should you report? Support your answer.
119. Many times errors are expressed in terms of percentage. The
percent error is the absolute value of the difference of the true
value and the experimental value, divided by the true value,
and multiplied by 100.

0 true value 2 experimental value 0
3 100
true value
Calculate the percent error for the following measurements.
a. The density of an aluminum block determined in an
experiment was 2.64 g/cm3. (True value 2.70 g/cm3.)
b. The experimental determination of iron in iron ore was
16.48%. (True value 16.12%.)
c. A balance measured the mass of a 1.000-g standard as
0.9981 g.
120. A person weighed 15 pennies on a balance and recorded the
following masses:
Percent error 5

3.112 g

3.109 g

3.059 g

2.467 g

3.079 g

2.518 g

3.129 g

2.545 g

3.050 g

3.053 g

3.054 g

3.072 g

3.081 g

3.131 g

3.064 g

Curious about the results, he looked at the dates on each penny.
Two of the light pennies were minted in 1983 and one in 1982.
The dates on the 12 heavier pennies ranged from 1970 to 1982.
Two of the 12 heavier pennies were minted in 1982.
a. Do you think the Bureau of the Mint changed the way it
made pennies? Explain.
b. The person calculated the average mass of the 12 heavy
pennies. He expressed this average as 3.0828 g 6 0.0482 g.
What is wrong with the numbers in this result, and how
should the value be expressed?

